  TRAINING FACTORY INDUSTRY 4.0

                                                   Activity booklet

1
   Contents

   Introduction                                                         p. 4

   Industry 4.0 New developments for Training Factory Industry 4.04.0   p. 6

   Getting started                                                      p. 8

   The individual factory components                                    p. 9

   Vacuum Suction Gripper 24V (VGR)                                     p. 9

   Automated high-bay warehouse 24V (HBW)                               p.10

   Environmental sensor                                                 p.10

   Multi-processing station with kiln 24V (MPO)                         p.11

   Sorting line with colour recognition 24V (SLD)                       p.12

   Environmental station with surveillance camera 24V (SSC)             p.14

   Surveillance camera in multi-processing station                      p.15

   Environmental sensor and photo resistance in high-bay warehouse      p.15

   Input/output station with colour detection and NFC Reader 24V (SSC)  p.15

   TXT controller with adapter board                                    p.16

   Factory status display                                               p.16

   Block diagram of the factory                                         p.17

   Network structure of the factory                                     p.18

   Commissioning and adapting the SIMATIC controller CPU1512SP          p.19

   Commissioning and adapting the SIMATIC controller CPU1516F

   with ET200SP on PROFINET IRT                                         p.35

   Connecting the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 to the Internet      p.55

   Connecting the nano Router TP-Link (WR802N) in WISP mode             p.55

   Training Factory Industry 4.0dashboard in the fischertechnik cloud   p.66

   User log-in                                                          p.66

   Cloud connection                                                     p.67

   Factory dashboard                                                    p.69

   Dashboard camera                                                     p.72

   Environmental station dashboard                                      p.73

   Operating the factory with the fischertechnik cloud                  p.76

   Task 1                                                               p.77

   Task 2                                                               p.78

   Task 3                                                               p.81

   Task 4                                                               p.81

   Task 5                                                               p.82

   Task 6                                                               p.84

   Task 7                                                               p.85

   Task 8                                                               p.86

2
   Training Factory Industry 4.0fischertechnik Node-RED dashboard              p.87
   Calibrating the system in the Training Factory Industry 4.0 fischertechnik
   Node-RED Dashboard                                                          p.92
   Component description                                                       p.98
   Factory module assignment plans                                             p.109
   Programming tasks                                                           p.123
                                                                               p.124
          Programming task 1                                                   p.134
          Programming task 2                                                   p.136
          Programming task 3                                                   p.138
          Programming task 4                                                   p.140
          Programming task 5                                                   p.142
          Programming task 6                                                   p.145
          Programming task 7

3
 Introduction

                                                     Digitisation in industrial production
                                                     calls for stronger networking and
                                                     smarter information at all levels of
                                                     production. With fischertechnik
                                                     Training Factory Industry 4.04.0,
                                                     these digitisation activities can be
                                                     simulated, learned and applied on a
                                                     small scale before they are
                                                     implemented on a large scale.
 A highly flexible, modular, inexpensive and robust training and simulation model
 which is extremely easy to use.

  The fischertechnik learning environment can be used to learn about and
  comprehend Industry 4.0 applications in vocational school and training
  applications, and can also be used for research, teaching and development at
  universities in companies and in IT departments. The simulation depicts the
  ordering process, the production process and the delivery process in digitised
  and networked process steps.

  It consists of factory modules like storage and retrieval stations, vacuum
  suction grippers, high-bay warehouse, multi-processing station with kiln, a
  sorting section with colour detection, an environmental sensor and a pivoting
  camera.

  After workpieces are ordered via the dashboard in the fischertechnik cloud,
  they go through the individual factory modules. The current status is shown in
  the fischertechnik cloud. The integrated environmental sensor reports values
  for temperature, humidity, air pressure and air quality. The camera sees the
  entire system through the vertical and horizontal pan range and can thus be
  used for web-based remote surveillance.

4
  Individual workpieces are tracked using NFC (Near Field Communication): A
  unique identification number (ID) is assigned to each workpiece. This enables
  traceability and visibility of the current status of the workpieces in the
  machining process.
  The Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 can be controlled by a SIMATIC S7-1500
  programmable logic controller (PLC) made by SIEMENS (not included in the
  scope of delivery for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0).
  Note: Control systems from other manufacturers may also be used. Then, the
  source codes can be imported to create the programs, depending on the
  controller used. These are available at:
  https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v/tree/master
  /PLC_SCL_sources
  A TXT controller serves as MQTT broker and interface to the fischertechnik
  cloud. MQTT (Message Queuing Telemetry Transport) is an open message
  protocol that enables the transmission of data in the form of messages between
  devices.
  Communication between the PLC and TXT controller is carried out using an IoT
  gateway via OPC UA. OPC UA (OPC Unified Architecture) is a standard for
  exchanging data across different platforms.

5
        Industry 4.0 New developments for Training Factory Industry 4.04.0
                                                         The popular, fully-automated fischertechnik factory
                                                         simulation is the basis for developing Training Factory
                                                         Industry 4.04.0. Here is a link to a video for anyone
                                                         interested in the simulation, or anyone just getting started
                                                         working with it. The video provides a good overview of how
                                                         the system works:
                                                         https://youtu.be/BApxuYlsT_w

                                 The vacuum suction gripper fits the stacker crane with workpieces. This stores
                                 the workpieces in the high bay, sorted by colour Next, the workpieces are
                                 brought to the multi-processing station where they are processed. Then the
                                 machined workpieces are sorted by colour in the sorting line and transported
                                 to storage locations. From there, the vacuum suction gripper transports the
                                 workpieces back to the high-bay warehouse. This is a never-ending,
                                 repetitive cycle.

New additions to Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 include:
    - Additional input/output station with quality control
    - Sensor station with integrated camera and environmental sensor
    - A SIEMENS-SPS SIMATIC S7-1500 as controller
         (not included in the scope of delivery for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0)
    - Example programs written in standard language for SIMATIC S7-1500
    - Connecting to the fischertechnik cloud
    - A TXT controller as MQTT broker and interface to the
         fischertechnik cloud
    - IoT gateway (Raspberry Pi) with Node-RED
    - Using NFC/RFID to identify workpieces
    - Integrated WiFi router
    - Presenting and using data on a dashboard in the fischertechnik cloud
    - Displaying data and calibrating the stations in a Node-RED dashboard
    - Displaying the current system status via a traffic light

6
The individual innovations are explained in more detail in the following chapters.

The following variants are still available for Learning Factory 4.0 24V:
    · 554868 Learning factory 4.0 24V
         Learning Factory 4.0 24V without PLC and without PLC connection board.
    · 560841 Learning Factory 4.0 24V with PLC connection board
         Learning Factory 4.0 24V without PLC but with PLC connection board and a desktop power supply
         24V, 280W. A separate PLC can be connected via the PLC connection board.
    · 560840 Learning Factory 4.0 24V compl. with PLC S7-1500
         Learning Factory 4.0 24V complete with PLC S7-1500 with PLC connection board and a desktop power
         supply 24V, 280W.

Software for the SIEMENS PLC SIMATIC S7-1500
The SIMATIC S7-1500 is programmed using version 16 of the TIA portal and the programming language structured
text (ST or SCL)
Software for TXT controller: C/C++ API programming interface
The software applications are written in C/C++ and are already loaded on the controller in the ready-to-
start status. The corresponding C/C++ library and the API are published on Github:
https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v.
This library can be used to write customised C/C++ programs for the learning factory.
Software for the IoT gateway
A finished Node-RED application is already loaded onto the IoT gateway.
Node-RED is available here as open-source software from the OpenJS Foundation:
https://nodered.org.

 First steps

Once you have carefully unpacked the Learning Factory 4.0 and removed
the transport lock, carry out a visual inspection to see whether any
components have become loose or damaged during transport. Attach
any loose components back in the right place. Check whether all cables
and hoses are connected. You can connect non-connected cables
correctly with the aid of the assignment diagrams.

7
  554868 Learning Factory 4.0 24V
Connect the Learning Factory adapter boards to
the PLC. This can be done using either flat ribbon
cables at the corresponding 34-pole ST1
connectors or via the terminals.
Note: For further details on the assignment diagrams, see the
chapter Assignment diagrams for the factory modules.

  560840 Learning Factory 4.0 24V compl. with PLC S7-1500
Note that in the case of the Learning Factory with
PLC, the Learning Factory has already been
calibrated on delivery. Please check the serial
number of the PLC, e.g. "S1001" (sticker on the
model and on the PLC connection board). It is
essential that the PLC and the corresponding
model are only connected with the same serial
number. This is the only way to ensure that the
calibration data match.

  560841 Learning Factory 4.0 24V with PLC connection
  board
Mount the PLC on the top-hat rail on the PLC connection board and use
the PLC with this.
Note: For further details on the assignment of the PLC connection board,
see the chapter Assignment diagrams for the factory modules.

8
  560841 Learning Factory 4.0 24V with PLC connection board and
  560840 Learning Factory 4.0 24V compl. with PLC S7-1500
Connect the PLC using the two cables provided. The connections are marked (I) and (II) on both the model
and the PLC connection board.
Note: For further details on the assignment of the connection cables, see the chapter Assignment diagrams
for the factory modules.

Connect the PLC SIMATIC S7-1500 to the nano router TP-link using one of the network cables provided and use
the second network cable to connect the PLC to the IOT Gateway (Raspberry Pi 4), see illustration.
Note: Refer also to the chapter Network structure of the factory
9
Now prepare the 24V power supply for the Learning Factory 4.0:
  554868 Learning Factory 4.0 24V

Please use an external 24V power supply (min. 10A recommended). This power supply is not included in the
scope of supply of this variant.

  560841 Learning Factory 4.0 24V with PLC connection board and
  560840 Learning Factory 4.0 24V compl. with PLC S7-1500

The 24V power supply is connected via the 6-pole connection on the PLC board. Now plug the 24V power
supply into the socket.
Check the fuses on the PLC connection board. The six LEDs at the edge of the PLC connection board now
have to light up green.
Switch the PLC and the TXT controller on (ON/OFF) to test them. If everything is working, the display should
start up, the PLC and the TXT controller boot and the control lamps light up.
Finally, equip the high-bay shelf with the 9 empty black containers provided.
560840 Learning Factory 4.0 24V compl. with PLC S7-1500:
With this variant, the following chapters can be skipped and the factory can be put into operation as
explained in the chapter Connecting the Learning Factory 4.0 to the internet.

10
The individual factory components

This chapter introduces the individual factory components and briefly explains their function.

What are robots?

The Association of German Engineers (VDI) defines industrial robots in VDI Guideline 2860 as follows:

"Industrial robots are universally applicable multi-axis motion machines whose movements with respect
to movement sequence and paths or angles are freely programmable and, if necessary, sensor-guided (i.e.,
without mechanical or human intervention). They can be equipped with grippers, tools or other means of
production and can perform handling and/or manufacturing tasks".

  Vacuum Suction Gripper 24V (VGR)
                                                     The 3-axis robot with vacuum suction gripper
                                                     positions workpieces quickly and precisely in
                                                     three-dimensional space. Workspace: X-axis
                                                     270°, Y-axis (forward/backward) 140 mm, Z-axis Buttons
                                                     (up/down) 120 mm. The 3D vacuum suction
                                                     gripper, therefore, is an industrial robot that can
                                                     be used for handling tasks. The vacuum gripper
                                                     picks up workpieces and move them within a
                                                     working space. This

working space is based on the robot's kinematic structure and defines the area that the robot Encoder engine
effector can work within.
In the case of the vacuum suction pad, the vacuum unit is the effector and the working space
corresponds to a hollow cylinder whose vertical axis coincides with the robot's axis of
rotation.
The geometric shape of the working space is based on the kinematic structure, which is shown Compressor

in the illustration and which is composed of a rotary and two translational axes.
The typical work order for this kind of robot can be subdivided into the following work steps:

    · Positioning of the suction gripper on the workpiece                                       Cylinder

    · Mounting the workpiece

    · Transporting the workpiece within the work area

    · Depositing the workpiece

Positioning the suction gripper or transporting the workpiece can be defined as a point-to-point movement or as

                                                                                                                                                                               3/2-way solenoid

a continuous path. Controlling the individual axes takes place sequentially and/or in parallel and it ivsalsveignificantly

influenced by workspace obstacles that exist in the workspace or by predefined intermediate stations. The

suction gripper is controlled using a 3/2-way solenoid valve and two coupled pneumatic cylinders to generate

vacuum pressure.

                                                                                                Vacuum

11
    Automated high-bay warehouse 24V (HBW)

What is a high-bay warehouse?

                                             A high-bay warehouse is a storage

              High-bay operating vice        area that saves space and allows

                                             computer-aided storage and retrieval

                                             of goods. In most cases, high-bay                Photo-transistor
                                                                                                   Buttons
    High bay                                 warehouses are designed as pallet-
                                                                                                 Mini motor
                                             rack  warehouses.       This                    Encoder engine

                                             standardisation ensures a high

                                             degree of automation and allows for

                                             connection to an ERP system

                    Conveyor technique with  (enterprise resource planning). High-
                    identification

                                             bay warehouses include

Very efficient use of space and a large required investment. Stacker cranes store and

retrieve goods that are then moved into an alley, which is located between two rows of

high-bay shelves. This area is part of the pre-zone where the goods are identified. Goods

are provided and delivered to the stacker crane via conveyor technology, such as chain

conveyors, roller conveyors or vertical conveyors. No one should be present in this area if

the storage and retrieval machines are automated. In the case of the automated high bay,

a conveyor belt transports the goods.

Environment sensor

The environmental sensor was built on the base plate of the high-bay warehouse for space
reasons. The electrical connections, however, are on the TXT controller.

12
    Multi-processing station with kiln 24V (MPO)

                            Milling                                  The workpiece automatically passes
    Kiln                                                             through several stations that
                                                                     simulate different processes in the
                                                  Suction

                                                           Ejector

                                                                     multi-processing station with kiln.

                                                                     Different conveyor technologies,        Mini motor
                                                                                                          Photo-transistor
                                     Kiln slider           Conveyor  such as a conveyor belt,
                                     Turntable                                                                 Buttons
                                                                                                              Vacuum
turntable and a vacuum suction gripper are used. The machining process starts with the kiln.
                                                                                                            Compressor
To initiate processing, the workpiece is placed on the oven pusher. In doing so, the                           Cylinder

photoelectric barrier is interrupted, which causes the kiln door to open and then retract the

kiln slider. At the same time, the vacuum suction gripper, which brings the workpiece to the

turntable after the firing process, is requested. Following the firing process, the kiln gate is re-

opened and the oven slide re-extended. The positioned vacuum suction gripper that is already

in place picks the workpiece up, transports it to the turntable and places it there. The turntable

positions the workpiece under the miller, lingers there for the machining time and then moves

the workpiece to the pneumatically-actuated ejector. The ejector pushes the workpiece onto

the conveyor belt, which conveys the workpiece to a photoelectric barrier and then to the

sorting system. Passing through the photoelectric barrier causes the turntable to return to its

original position and for the conveyor belt to stop with a time delay.

The program runs in parallel. The system is divided into the three units: Kiln, vacuum suction

gripper, and turntable. The individual processes communicate with one another, ensuring,

for instance, that no collisions occur.

For example, the kiln triggers the movement of the vacuum suction gripper at two points in

the program sequence, which ensures that the vacuum suction gripper is not only in the right

spot at the right time, but also that it does not reach into the void. Likewise, the turntable is

activated after the workpiece has been deposited by the vacuum suction gripper.

                                                                                                          3/2-way solenoid
                                                                                                                 valve

13
Sorting line with colour recognition 24V (SLD)

Colour recognition                              The sorting line with colour
         Bearing locations
                                                recognition is used to

                            Ejector             automatically separate

                                                workpieces of different

                                                colours. Components with                         Compressor
                                                                                                    Cylinder
                                                the same geometry but of
                                                                                               3/2-way solenoid
                                                different colours are fed to                          valve
                                                                                                    Buttons
                                                the conveyor belt via a
                                                                                                 Photo-transistor
                                                colour sensor                                      Colour sensor

and then separated by colour. A motor drives the conveyor belt and an impulse sensor                 Mini motor
measures the conveying path. Pneumatic cylinders, which are assigned to the
corresponding storage locations and operated by solenoid valves, eject the
workpieces. Several photoelectric barriers control the flow of the workpieces and
whether there are workpieces in the storage locations.

Colour detection is carried out using an optical colour sensor that emits light, and
determines the colour of a surface based on reflections from the surface. Thus, the colour
sensor is strictly a reflection sensor that indicates how well a surface reflects light. The
measured value of the sensor is therefore not proportional to the wavelength of the
measured colour and assigning colour coordinates or colour spaces (for example RGB or
CMYK) is not possible. In addition to an object's colour, ambient light, the object's surface
and the distance of the object from the sensor affect the quality of the reflection. This is
why it is critical that the colour sensor is protected from ambient light and the surfaces of
the objects are comparable.

It is also important that the sensor is installed perpendicular to the surface of the object.
Distinguishing among the coloured workpieces is done in thresholds that compare the
measured values of the individual colours against each other. Since the value ranges of
different colour sensors differ, these limit values must be adjusted.

Both the process and the conveyor belt start if a workpiece is placed on the conveyor belt
and the workpiece interrupts the photoelectric barrier. For a colour to be recognised, the
workpiece passes through a darkened lock in which a colour sensor is installed. During
this time interval, the minimum value of the measured colour values is determined and
assigned to the workpiece. In the time required for the workpiece to pass the colour
sensor, the previous minimum value is compared with the current measured value, which
may then replace the earlier measured value.

The photoelectric barrier, which is located before the first ejection point, controls whether
14
a workpiece is ejected. Depending on the detected colour value, the corresponding
pneumatic cylinder is time-delayed triggered after the workpiece interrupts photoelectric
barrier. Next, the pulse button is activated. It registers the rotation of the gear that drives
the conveyor. Unlike a time-based delay, this approach is robust in withstanding conveyor
speed fluctuations. The ejected workpieces are fed through three slides to the respective
depositories.
The storage locations are equipped with photocells that recognize whether the storage
location is filled or not. However, the photocell cannot determine how many workpieces
are in a storage location.

15
    Environmental station with surveillance camera 24V (SSC)                                    Photo-resistor,
                                                                                                environmental
                                                     The environmental station with
                                                     surveillance camera is used to record           sensor
                                                     measured values within the factory. The
                                                     mobile camera station is located on the    Encoder engine
                                                     multi-processing station and visually
                                                     monitors the system.
                                                     The new environmental sensor and a photo
                                                     resistor allow the air temperature,
                                                     humidity, air pressure, air quality and
                                                     brightness to be measured. The values are
                                                     displayed graphically.

                                                                                  Camera

    The camera can be rotated using a virtual joystick and it

    can be tilted to monitor the factory. The images are also

    displayed on the monitor screen.

    The different sensor data is controlled on an ongoing
    basis on a user interface, the "Dashboard". The
    movement axes of the camera can also be controlled
    here. A LED display indicates when the set limit values
    have been exceeded. The red LED always lights up when
    an image from the camera is being transferred to the
    cloud.

16
Surveillance camera in the multi-processing station              p

    The two "multi-processing centre and surveillance
    camera" modules have been combined into one
    overall module at the factory. The advantage here is
    that the camera is at the highest point in the factory
    and can thus monitor the entire system. The
    surveillance camera also has a
    visual indicator (red light).
    Blinking indicates images are
    being recorded.

                                                                 Control lamp red

Environmental sensor and photo resistance in high-bay warehouse

    The environmental sensor and photo-resistor are
    located on the high-bay module. Both of them are
    connected to the TXT controller,

Input/output station with colour detection and NFC Reader 24V (DPS)

                                                                         The in- and output station consists of a total of 3
                                                                         work areas:

                                                                          · The input and output unit
                                                                          · Colour recognition
                                                                          · The NFC reader

17
The photoelectric barrier at the input station detects whether a workpiece to be stored in  Colour sensor
it is present. If this is the case, the information is sent to the                          Photo-transistor
continuing program (vacuum suction gripper picks up the workpiece).
Before the workpiece is processed any further, the colour sensor determines of the
workpiece colour.
After colour detection, different data are assigned to the workpiece. To detect a
workpiece's colour, the vacuum suction gripper places the workpiece on the NFC reader.

First, all data in the memory is deleted and the workpiece marked
as raw.
The reader then writes data relevant to the workpiece on the
NFC tag NTAG213 in the workpiece.

Important note: An NFC tag has a unique ID. This cannot be changed.                         The NFC reader

If one or more workpieces are ordered, they will be sent to the output area after various tasks have been carried
out. Previously, additional production data for each workpiece could be stored in the available memory on the
NFC tag.

TXT controller with adapter board                                                           Adapter board

The TXT controller and an adapter board to connect the environmental sensor and photo
resistor are also located on the input / output station. The camera is also connected here
via a USB interface.

                                                                                            TXT controller

Factory status display

Three LEDs indicate factory status.

Green   means all stations are waiting.                                                     Status display
Yellow  means that at least one station is active.
Red     means an error that must be acknowledged on the dashboard in the cloud
        for the Training Factory Industry 4.0to continue.

18
Block diagram of the factory

                                                     The block diagram shows you
                                                     how the individual factory
                                                     components communicate
                                                     with each other and how the
                                                     system is integrated with the
                                                     Internet and the fischertechnik
                                                     cloud. The block diagram also
                                                     shows which information the
                                                     user can retrieve via his PC,
                                                     tablet or smartphone.

In the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 24V, three different controllers communicate with one another, and
are connected to one another via a Switch/Router.

·   PLC (process control of the model, PLC program)

·   IoT gateway (Node-RED environment as adapter between OPC/UA and MQTT, dashboard to control

the model)

·   TXT controller (fischertechnik sensors and connection to the fischertechnik cloud)

The PLC (not included in the scope of delivery) contains process control for the entire Learning Factory.

Since the MQTT interface in the PLC controller is not a standard interface, an additional IoT-Gateway
(Raspberry Pi) with a Node-RED environment serves as an adapter to the MQTT interface. The PLC acts as
a server, providing the data required to the IoT Gateway via the OPC/UA standard interface in the local
network. The IoT Gateway then forwards the messages to the TXT controller.

The TXT controller serves as a gateway to the fischertechnik cloud https://www.fischertechnik-cloud.com.

In addition, the components camera, RFID/NFC reader, environmental sensor, BME680 and a brightness
sensor are connected here and deliver data to the cloud.

Users can access the dashboard for the Node-RED application in the IoT gateway via a web browser.

19
Network structure of the factory
The following image represents the network structure and the standard IP addresses used:

    PLC with 3 Ethernet ports

    IP:  192.168.0.1

    Subnet: 255.255.255.0

    Gateway: 192.168.0.252

    IOT Gateway (Raspberry Pi)

    IP:  192.168.0.5

    Subnet: 255.255.255.0       Internet

    Gateway: 192.168.0.252

    TXT controller (wireless)

    IP:  192.168.0.10

    Subnet: 255.255.255.0

    Gateway: 192.168.0.252

    Optional Browser PC                   nano Router TP-link (WR802N)

    (Wired or wireless)                   Hotspot Router Mode
                                          WAN: WISP
                                          LAN1: 192.168.0.252

    IP:  192.168.0.x

    Subnet: 255.255.255.0

    Gateway: 192.168.0.252

The Training Factory Industry 4.0can be connected to wireless WiFi via a nano router TP link (WR802N) in
WISP mode (hotspot router mode) to a wireless WAN. The Ethernet interface of the nano router must have
an IP address of: 192.168.0.252 and is connected to the PLC (IP: 192.168.0.1). The IOT gateway must have
IP:192.168.0.5, and is also connected to the PLC.

DHCP is activated on the nano router, ensuring that the TXT controller is always supplied with the same IP
address 192.168.0.10. Details on settings for the nano router are provided in the section Connecting Training
Factory Industry 4.04.0

NTP time synchronisation can also be completed via the Internet NVP server. Remote maintenance is not
possible.

20
Commissioning and adapting the SIMATIC controller CPU1512SP
The next few pages show how to connect the programmable logic controller (PLC) SIMATIC S7-1500 to the CPU
1512SP and how to load the program solution for complete factory operation.
This program solution is available as archive LearningFactory_4_0_24V_V02.zap16 for the TIA Portal V16, and is
the standard solution for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0. However, the solution can also be adapted very
easily. for example, it can be adapted to different configurations with different CPUs in the SIMATIC ET200SP
series, or with different ET200SP input/output modules.

The assemblies used in the standard configuration are shown here:

21
The program solutions are available at:
https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v/tree/master/PLC_SCL_sources
Note:
This section describes an example of commissioning for a SIEMENS SIMATIC S7-1500 controller with CPU1512SP.
If a different controller is used, then other software tools must be used to create, and load the programs, and to
operate the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0.
The source codes can be imported to create the programs, depending on the controller used. These are available
at:
https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v/tree/master/PLC_SCL_sources
.

Structure and operation of the CPU 1512SP-1 PN

Here is an overview of the elements of the CPU 1512SP-1 PN with bus adapter

 Profile rail unlocking mechanism
 Label strips
 LEDs for status and error indicators
 LED for displaying supply voltage
 Operating mode switch
 Slot for the SIMATIC Memory Card
 Connection for supply voltage (included in the scope of delivery)
 Cable mount and attachment for port P3 of the PROFINET interface
 LEDs as status indicators on the PROFINET interface to ports P1, P2 and P3
 Port P3 of the PROFINET interface: RJ45 port on the CPU
 Individual view of the bus adapter
 Port P1 R of the PROFINET interface: RJ45 port to bus adapter BA 2×RJ45
 Port P2 R of the PROFINET interface: RJ45 port to bus adapter BA 2×RJ45

22
Status and error indicators
The CPU 1512SP-1 PN and Bus-Adapter BA 2xRJ45 are equipped with the following diagnostic LEDs:

 RUN/STOP LED (yellow/green LED)
 ERROR LED (red LED)
 MAINT LED (yellow LED)
 LINK RX/TX-LED for the ports X1 P1 and X1 P2 (green LEDs on bus adapter)
 POWER LED (green LED)
 LINK RX/TX-LED for port X1 P3 (green LED on CPU)

SIMATIC Memory Card
A SIMATIC Micro Memory Card is used as the storage module for the CPUs. It is a specially pre-formatted memory
card which is compatible with the Windows file system.
The MMC must be inserted to operate the CPU, since the CPUs do not have an integrated load memory for the
programs. A common SD card reader is required to read/write the SIMATIC Memory Card with a laptop/PC. It can
be used, for instance, to copy files directly to the SIMATIC Memory Card using Windows Explorer, or delete all
program data.

Note: We recommend only inserting or removing the SIMATIC Memory Card into/from the CPU when it is powered
down.

Operating mode switch
The operating mode switch can be used to set the current CPU operating mode. The operating mode switch is a
toggle switch with 3 settings:

Setting  Meaning           Explanation

RUN      RUN operating The CPU processes the user program
STOP
MRES     SmToOdPe operating The CPU processes the user program

         mMoedmeory reset  Setting to reset the CPU

STEP 7 Professional programming software in the TIA portal
The programming tool STEP 7 Professional is used to program and load the SPSen SIMATIC S7-1500.
Program solutions for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 have been created with version V16 of STEP 7
Professional in the TIA Portal.

Further details are provided in the SIEMENS handbooks at:
http://support.automation.siemens.com.

23
Resetting the controller and setting the IP address

Before you can load program solutions to the SIMATIC S7-1500, you should reset it to default settings and set the
IP address of the CPU 1512SP.
The following steps can be used to reset the CPU 1512SP to default settings.

              First, switch off the power supply to the controller and then remove the SIMATIC Micro Memory
                 Card inserted in the CPU 1512SP.

              To delete all program data from the SIMATIC Micro Memory Card in the CPU, you can simply insert
                 the SIMATIC Memory Card into a common SD card reader and delete data on the card using
                 Windows Explorer.

              Then, insert the SIMATIC Memory Card back into the CPU 1512SP and switch on the power supply
                 to the controller.

Note: We recommend only inserting or removing the SIMATIC Memory Card into/from the CPU when it is powered
down. Otherwise, it may be damaged.
Note: You should not format the SIMATIC Memory Card, just delete the data.

24
To be able to program a SIMATIC S7-1500 controller from a laptop/PC from the CPU, you will need a TCP/IP
connection.
It is important for the IP addresses of the two devices to match, to ensure the computer and SIMATIC S7-1500 can
communicate with one another via TCP/IP.
First, we will show you how to set the IP address of a computer using a Windows 10 operating system.

              Mark the network symbol below in the task bar and then click  Network settings.

              In the network settings window that opens, click  Ethernet and then click  Change adapter
                 options.

25
              Select the desired  LAN connection you want use to connect the controller, then click 
                 Properties.

              Now, select the  Properties for  internet protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4).

26
              Now you can use the following IP address, for instance  IP address: 192.168.0.99 and enter the
                 following  subnet mask 255.255.255.0. Then accept the settings by pressing  OK.

Now, you can assign the IP address to the CPU1512SP as shown in the following steps.
              Connect your laptop/PC directly to one of the three Ethernet interfaces on the CPU1512SP and
                 switch on the power supply to the controller.
              Now, start the Totally Integrated Automation Portal by double clicking on it. (  TIA Portal V16)

27
              Select  Online&Diagnostics and then open the  Project view.

              In the project navigation, select the previously set network card under  Online access. When
                 you click  Update available devices, you will see the IP address (if already set) or the MAC
                 address (if the IP address has not yet been assigned) for the connected SIMATIC S7-1500. Here,
                 select  Online&Diagnostics.

28
              You will find  Assign IP address under  Functions. Here, enter the following IP address, for
                 instance:  IP address: 192.168.0.1  Subnet mask 255.255.255.0. Now, click  Assign IP address
                 and your SIMATIC S7-1500 will be assigned this new address.

              The  Info  General window provides messages on the status of address assignment.

29
Open the program solutions for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0
Open the program solutions for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 using the following steps.

              In the menu of the TIA portal, select  Project  Open and then  Search.

              Then, click the compressed V16 project  LearningFactory_4_0_24V and select a target path on
                 your computer to unpack the project there.

  Note: The program solutions are available at:
  https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v/tree/master
  /PLC_SCL_sources

30
Adapting the hardware configuration
The project is now open and will be displayed in the project navigation at left.
If your hardware components differ from those in the program solutions, these components must be adjusted in
the TIA portal.

              To do so, first open the  Device configuration.

              Mark one of the different components and then click  Exchange device.

31
              You will then see a dialogue where you can select from compatible devices.

       You must select the correct BaseUnit for the signal modules:
       - Use potential group for the left module (dark BaseUnit)
       - Facilitate new potential group (light BaseUnit)

           You can change these settings under  Properties  General  Potential group.

32
Load the control program to the CPU1512SP
The following steps can be used to load the CPU 1512SP.

              Before you continue, you should click the  Save project button to save your project.
              To load your entire CPU, including hardware configuration and program solutions, to the device,

                 mark the  PLC [CPU1512SP-1 PN] folder and click the  Load to device symbol.

33
                The Manager will open for configuring connection properties (expanded loading). First, select the correct
                     interface. This involves three steps.
                     - Type of PG/PC interface  PN/IE
                     - PG/PC interface  here, for instance.: Intel(R) Ethernet Connection ...
                     - Connection with interface/subnet  Directly to port ,1 X1`
                     Then, activate the field  Display all compatible devices, and start the search for devices on the network
                     by clicking the  Start search button.
                     If your CPU is displayed in the list, select it and start loading.
                     (Load  CPU 1512SP-1 PN)

34
                First, you will see a preview with information on the loading process, data security, etc... Continue with 
                     loading.

                Now, select the option  Start assembly before completing the loading process with  Complete.

Finally, you can check online to ensure the configuration was loaded correctly. Then, set the time in the CPU if the
set NTP server is not available for automatic time synchronisation.

              Mark the CPU  PLC[CPU 1512SP-1 PN] and select  Connect online.
35
       Note: The symbol should be green here if there are no errors.
              To set the time, open  Online & Diagnostics, then select  Set time under  Functions and then
                  Accept, to adopt the time from your laptop/PC.

36
Commissioning and adjusting the SIMATIC controller
CPU1516F with ET200SP on PROFINET IRT

The next few pages show how to connect the programmable logic controller (PLC) SIMATIC S7-1500 to the CPU
1516F-3 PN/DP and how to load the program solution for complete factory operation.
This solution includes a decentralised connection of system signals to an ET200SP, which communicates with the
CPU via PROFINET IRT (Isochrones Realtime). This section also describes commissioning of this ET200SP.
This program solution is available as archive LearningFactory_4_0_24V_PROFINET_V02.zap16 for the TIA Portal
V16, and is an alternative solution for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0.
However, the solution can also be adapted very easily. for example, it can be adapted to different configurations
with different CPUs in the SIMATIC S7-1500 series, or with different ET200SP input/output modules.

The assemblies used in the alternative solution are shown here:

37
The program solutions are available at:
https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v/tree/master/PLC_SCL_sources
Note:
This section describes an example of commissioning for a SIEMENS SIMATIC S7-1500 controller with CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP.
If a different controller is used, then other software tools must be used to create, and load the programs, and to
operate the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0.
The source codes can be imported to create the programs, depending on the controller used. These are available
at:
https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v/tree/master/PLC_SCL_sources

Structure and operation of the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP.

Here is an overview of the elements of the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP with bus adapter

                LED indicators for the current operating status and diagnostic status of the CPU
                Display
                Operating buttons

38
Status and error indicators
The CPU is equipped with the following LED indicators:

                RUN/STOP LED (yellow/green LED)
                ERROR-LED (red LED)
                MAINT-LED (yellow LED)
                LINK RX/TX-LED for Port X1 P1 (yellow/green LED)
                LINK RX/TX-LED for port X1 P2 (yellow/green LED)
                LINK RX/TX-LED for port X2 P1 (yellow/green LED)
Operating and connection elements of the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP behind the front flap

                LED indicators for the current operating status and diagnostic status of the CPU
                Display connection
                Slot for the SIMATIC Memory Card
                Operating mode switch
                LED indicators for the 3 ports on the PROFINET interfaces X1 and X2
                MAC addresses of the interfaces
                PROFIBUS interface (X3)
                PROFINET interface (X2) with 1 port
                PROFINET interface (X1) with 2 ports
                Connection for supply voltage
                Attachment screws

39
Note: The front flap with display can be removed and inserted while operations are ongoing.
The S7-1500 CPU has a front flap with a display and operating buttons. Controlling and status information can be
shown on different menus on the display, and a wide variety of settings can be changed. Use the operating buttons
to navigate through the menus.
The CPU display offers the following functions:

        You can select from 6 different display languages.
        Diagnostic messages are shown in clear text.
        Interface settings can be changed on site.
        A password can be assigned to operate the display via the TIA portal.

View of the display of an S7-1500:

                CPU status information
                Designation of the sub-menu
                Display field for information
                Navigation tool, e.g. OK/ESC or the page number

SIMATIC Memory Card
A SIMATIC Micro Memory Card is used as the storage module for the CPUs. It is a specially pre-formatted memory
card which is compatible with the Windows file system.
The MMC must be inserted to operate the CPU, since the CPUs do not have an integrated load memory for the
programs. A common SD card reader is required to read/write the SIMATIC Memory Card with a laptop/PC. It can
be used, for instance, to copy files directly to the SIMATIC Memory Card using Windows Explorer, or delete all
program data.

Note: We recommend only inserting or removing the SIMATIC Memory Card into/from the CPU when it is powered
down.

Operating mode switch

The operating mode switch can be used to set the current CPU operating mode. The operating mode switch is a

toggle switch with 3 settings:

Setting Meaning                 Explanation

RUN   RUN operating The CPU processes the user program
STOP
MRES  SmToOdPe operating The CPU processes the user program

      Mmoedmeory reset          Setting to reset the CPU

40
Structure and operation of the SIMATIC ET 200SP

The decentralised peripheral device SIMATIC ET 200SP is a modular, decentralised peripheral system for
connecting the process signals to a central automation system like SIMATIC S7-1500.
Decentralised peripheral devices are often used when signals need to be transmitted across a large distance, and
when this requires a large amount of wiring work. This allows signals to be collected in a decentral manner on
site and connected to the central controller via a bus system. The ET 200SP is connected via PROFINET IRT
(Isochrones Realtime) for the solution program for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0.
The decentralised peripheral device ET 200SP is mounted on a standard profile rail  and is composed of an
interface module  with bus adapter ,up to 32/64 peripheral modules inserted on BaseUnits ,   and a
final server module.

The decentralised peripheral devices provide inputs and outputs for on-site process connection that can be read
and written by the central assembly via PROFINET. The I/O assemblies are queried normally in the S7 program via
the input addresses (%I) and output addresses (%Q) are addressed.
STEP 7 Professional programming software in the TIA portal
The programming tool STEP 7 Professional is used to program and load the SPSen SIMATIC S7-1500 and
commission the ET200SP.
Program solutions for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 have been created with version V16 of STEP 7
Professional in the TIA Portal.
Further details on the programming software and PROFINET are provided in the SIEMENS handbooks at:
http://support.automation.siemens.com.

41
Resetting the controller and setting the IP address

Before you can load program solutions to the SIMATIC S7-1500, you should reset it to default settings and set the
IP address of the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP.
The following steps can be used to reset the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP to default settings.

              First, switch off the power supply to the controller and then remove the SIMATIC Micro Memory
                 Card inserted in the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP.

              To delete all program data from the SIMATIC Micro Memory Card in the CPU, you can simply insert
                 the SIMATIC Memory Card into a common SD card reader and delete data on the card using
                 Windows Explorer.

              Then, insert the SIMATIC Memory Card back into the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP and switch on the power supply

                     to the controller.

Note: We recommend only inserting or removing the SIMATIC Memory Card into/from the CPU when it is powered
down. Otherwise, it may be damaged.
Note: You should not format the SIMATIC Memory Card, just delete the data

42
To be able to program a SIMATIC S7-1500 controller from a laptop/PC from the CPU, you will need a TCP/IP
connection.
It is important for the IP addresses of the two devices to match, to ensure the computer and SIMATIC S7-1500 can
communicate with one another via TCP/IP.
First, we will show you how to set the IP address of a computer using a Windows 10 operating system.

              Mark the network symbol below in the task bar and then click  Network settings.

              In the network settings window that opens, click  Ethernet and then click  Change adapter
                 options.

43
              Select the desired  LAN connection you want use to connect the controller, then click 
                 Properties.

              Now, select the  Properties for  internet protocol Version 4 (TCP/IPv4).

44
              Now you can use the following IP address, for instance  IP address: 192.168.0.99 and enter the
                 following  subnet mask 255.255.255.0. Then accept the settings by pressing  OK.

Now, you can assign the IP address to the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP as shown in the following steps.
              Connect Port 1 of the Ethernet interface [X1] on the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP with Port 1 of the Ethernet
                 interface on the ET200SP. Connect your laptop directly to Port 2 of the Ethernet interface [X1] on
                 the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP. Switch on the power supply to the controller. The other components of the
                 Training Factory Industry 4.0can be connected to Port 2 of the Ethernet interface on the ET200SP.

Note: A correct network topology is required here, since this topology was determined for PROFINET IRT
communication in the project.

              Now, start the Totally Integrated Automation Portal by double clicking on it. (  TIA Portal V16)

45
              Select  Online&Diagnostics and then open the  Project view.

              In the project navigation, select the previously set network card under  Online access. When
                 you click  Update available devices, you will see the IP address (if already set) or the MAC
                 address (if the IP address has not yet been assigned) for the connected SIMATIC S7-1500. Here,
                 select  Online&Diagnostics.

46
              You will find  Assign IP address under  Functions. Here, enter the following IP address, for
                 instance:  IP address: 192.168.0.1  Subnet mask 255.255.255.0. Now, click  Assign IP address
                 and your SIMATIC S7-1500 will be assigned this new address.

              The  Info  General window provides messages on the status of address assignment.

47
Open the program solutions for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0
Open the program solutions for the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 using the following steps.

              In the menu of the TIA portal, select  Project  Open and then  Search.

              Then, click the compressed V16 project  LearningFactory_4_0_24V_PROFINET and select a
                 target path on your computer to unpack the project there.

Note: The program solutions are available at:
https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v/tree/master/PLC_SCL_sources

48
Adapting the hardware configuration
The project is now open and will be displayed in the project navigation at left.
If your hardware components differ from those in the program solutions, these components must be adjusted in
the TIA portal.

              To do so, first open the  Device configuration.

49
              Mark one of the different components and then click  Exchange device.
              You will then see a dialogue where you can select from compatible devices.
50
              To see an overview of associated IP addresses in a project, click the  Display addresses symbol
                 in the Network view.

       You must select the correct BaseUnit for the signal modules of the ET200SP:
       - Use potential group for the left module (dark BaseUnit)
       - Facilitate new potential group (light BaseUnit)

           You can change this setting in the  Device view of the ET200SP under  Properties
                   General  Potential group.

51
Load the control program to the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP
The following steps can be used to load the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP.

              Before you continue, you should click the  Save project button to save your project.
              To load your entire CPU, including hardware configuration and program solutions, to the device,

                 mark the  PLC [CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP] folder and click the  Load to device symbol.

              The Manager will open for configuring connection properties (expanded loading). First, select the
                 correct interface. This involves three steps.
                 - Type of PG/PC interface  PN/IE
                 - PG/PC interface  here, for instance.: Intel(R) Ethernet Connection ...
                 - Connection with interface/subnet  Directly to port ,1 X1`
                 Then, activate the field  Display all compatible devices, and start the search for devices on the
                 network by clicking the  Start search button.
                 If your CPU is displayed in the list, select it and start loading.
                 (Load  CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP)

52
              First, you will see a preview with information on the loading process, data security, etc... Continue
                 with  loading.

53
              Now, select the option  Start assembly before completing the loading process with  Complete.

Assign the device name for the PROFINET- IO- Device ET200SP
The device name is used by the IO-Controller CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP to detect the IO-Device ET200SP and establish
communication. Because of this, it must be assigned separately.
Use the following steps to do so.

              In the  Network view, mark the ET200SP with the device name  factory_PROFINET and select
                  Assign device name.

Note: The IP address set in the project is assigned later by the CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP controller when establishing
the communication connection.
54
              Online access must be set correctly in the dialogue used to assign PROFINET device names. Then,
                 you can select the device and filter by devices of the same type. If a new device is connected, the
                 list must be updated. (  PROFINET device name: factory_profinet  Type of PG/PC interface:
                 PN/IE  PG/PC interface: here: Intel(R) Ethernet Connection ...  Only display devices of the
                 same kind  Update list). Determine the right device using the MAC address printed on the device
                 before marking it, then click  Assign name to assign the device name.

Finally, check online to ensure the configuration was loaded correctly and the PROFINET device was successfully
connected by the controller. Then, set the time in the CPU if the set NTP server is not available for automatic time
synchronisation.
55
              Mark the CPU  PLC[CPU 1516F-3 PN/DP] and select  Connect online.

       Note: The symbol should be green here if there are no errors.
              To set the time, open  Online & Diagnostics, then select  Set time under  Functions and then
                  Accept, to adopt the time from your laptop/PC.

56
Connecting Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 to the Internet
To connect Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 to the internet and thereby to the fischertechnik cloud, connect
the nano Router TP-Link in WISP mode (Hotspot Router Mode) to a wireless WAN.
Then, you can access the Dashboard of the fischertechnik cloud via mobile devices like a tablet,
smartphone, laptop, or PC.

Connecting the nano Router TP-Link (WR802N) in WISP mode
The nano router TP-Link is connected to the IOT Gateway (Raspberry Pi) for power supply via USB. Alternatively,
however, it can also be connected to the included plug-in power supply.
The Ethernet cable of the nano Router TP-Link is connected directly to a free port on the PLC.

                                              PLC                                 WiFi router)  Fischertechnik
    IOT Gateway (Raspberry Pi)                                                                  Cloud

                                                                                                             Internet

                                                                             USB

    Plug-in power supply
    (included in delivery)

                                                   alternativ
                                                   e

                                                            nano Router TP-Link (WR802N)
                                                            Hotspot Router Mode
                                                            WAN: WISP
                                                            LAN1: 192.168.0.252

57
                                   The TP-Link must be configured to connect the nano Router TP-Link in WISP
                                   mode (Hotspot Router Mode) to a wireless WAN.
                                   Use your PC or a tablet to do so.
Important: Unplug your computer's (WiFi capable) existing internet connection with the router. To do so,
unplug the Ethernet LAN cable from the computer, and terminate any existing WiFi connection.
The nano Router TP-Link is permanently installed in your system. You must first perform a reset before you
integrate (configure) it into your working environment. Unplug the plug for the power supply on the TP-Link,
then plug it back in so that it restarts. The green light will flash on the TP-link. Use a pointed object (small
screwdriver) to press the reset button for 5 seconds. The lamp will go off. The TP-Link will restart. The lamp
will flash again.

                                                     Press the  Internet access button to open the
                                                     Internet access context menu on your computer. A
                                                     screen will appear showing the networks in your area.
                                                     The TP-Link should appear in the list. Click on WiFi
                                                     once and then WiFi once again if it doesn't. This will
                                                     restart the WiFi, and another search will be completed
                                                     for all WiFi networks.

58
                                                       In the next step, activate the displayed TP-link. An additional
                                                       context menu will appear. Select theConnect button.

                                                       After a short while, a pop-up window will appear asking you
                                                       to enter the network security key for your TP-link.
                                                    This can be found on the bottom of the TP-link.

After entering the key, confirm by pressing the Next button.
The next step is to check the security key and the TP-link is now
connected to your computer via WiFi.
The last pop-up window will show you that the connection is
successful.

59
Next, you need to configure the TP-link for your network. To do
this, open a WEB browser (Firefox or Chrome).
Access the page http://tplinkwifi.net Important note: Do not enter www. before the address
and go to this page. The following page will appear:

Enter "admin" as the user name and "admin" as the password, and confirm by pressing "Log In".
Confirm this page with setup information by pressing  Next.

60
The password should not be changed, otherwise it has to be changed on the TXT Controller. Confirm by
pressing  Next

Then, select  Operation Mode  WISP and confirm the selection with  Next.

61
For the  WAN Connection Type, select  Dynamic IP and confirm the selection with  Next.

Next, the  AP List will appear with nearby available WiFi Access Points (APs). Select your WiFi access point by
clicking  Connect

62
Adopt the  Client Settings and  AP Settings with  Next.
Note: The AP Settings should not be changed; otherwise the settings of the TXT controller will have to be adjusted.
You can take the Client Settings and Wireless Password from the configuration pages for your WiFi access point,
or request them from your network administrator.

                                                                                                                Wireless password for
                                                                                                                the WiFi access point

Then you will see an overview of settings. Adopt them by clicking  Finish.

63
Confirm the following message by clicking  OK.
                         The settings will be saved, and the system will restart (rebooting).

                            The status display shows the progress of the reboot.
                                                   Important note: It is possible that the connection from the
                                                   computer to the TP-link will be interrupted during the reboot.
                                                   Connect them by clicking Connect.

64
The status screen will open once the reboot is done. You can read different values for the status of the LAN and
WiFi connection here.

65
Then, set the IP address of the nano Router on LAN and for DHCP.
To do so, select  Network in the menu at left and then  LAN. Assign the TP-Link the
 IP address 192.168.0.252 with the  Subnet Mask 255.255.255.0.

Then, activate  DHCP by clicking  Enable and change the settings displayed here for the IP addresses. Accept
these settings with  Save.

66
Once the TXT controller is switched on, it will be displayed in the  DHCP Clients List with its MAC and IP address. If
it is not, turn on the TXT controller, wait until it has started up, and then update the view by clicking  Refresh.

The TXT controller should have a fixed IP address of 192.168.0.10. In the  Address Reservation menu, this address
can be re-assigned under  Edit and then adopted by clicking  Save.

Now, you can unplug the WiFi connection to the nano Router TP link.
67
Training Factory Industry 4.0dashboard in the fischertechnik
cloud

                     The dashboard can be accessed and operated via mobile devices such as tablets and
                     smartphones as well as laptops and PCs. It enables factory scenarios to be displayed
                     from three different perspectives:

                                 Customer view

                                 Supplier view

                                 Production view

User login

                     You have to log in before you can use the dashboard.
                     To log in, call up
                     www.fischertechnik-cloud.com
                     . The two best Internet browsers to use are "Firefox" or "Google Chrome".
                     Enter the address (URL). It will now appear on the following screen.

                     Important: If this page doesn't load, press "CTRL + F5" at the same time to reload the
                     page. This is a general browser problem.

68
Click "here" to log in for the first time:
Are you new to fischertechnik? Sign up now...
Fill out all fields and accept the data privacy policies. Check the box,
"I am not a robot" and answer the questions.
Confirm log-in by clicking:

After signing up, you will be able to log in using your user name and
password. As soon as you have done this, the dashboard will start
up. After carrying out the next item, the dashboard will populate with
data.

Cloud connection

Only one TXT controller will link from the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 to the
cloud, which also controls the movable camera. The WiFi connection to the
nano Router TP-link is a default setting.
The following settings are required for this TXT to connect
to the fischertechnik cloud:
On the TXT, activate the "Settings ­ Properties
- Cloud Client". Now click on the "Home" button to return to the "Home"
screen.

                                  Now connect the TXT controller to the fischertechnik
                                  cloud using "Settings ­ Network ­ Cloud Settings ­
                                  Pairing New".

69
                                   If the TXT controller is able to connect to the cloud, then a QR-code and
                                   pairing code will display. You now have 30 minutes to add your TXT controller
                                   to your account in the cloud. If this period of time elapses before you have
                                   done this, you will have to start all over with the pairing process.
                                   You can scan the QR code, e.g., by using the "Quick Scan" app, whereupon you
                                   will be automatically directed to the fischertechnik cloud.

                                                                            Alternatively, you can go to the
                                                                            fischertechnik cloud page to "Settings -
                                                                            Add controller" and manually enter the
                                                                            pairing code there.
                                       At this point enter any name you wish for the
                                       TXT controller, e.g., its ID, "TXT-7133".

                                 Now the TXT controller is connected to the cloud.
                                 Under "File - Cloud", load the application
                                 TxtGatewayPLC to the TXT Controller.

                                 As soon as you have connected to the cloud, start
                                 the applications on the TXT controller.

70
Factory dashboard

This will display with the following screen:

You can change the sequence of the individual screens to adjust your
requirements.
Click this button to close or expand the main menu for the cloud.

71
The individual windows and their functions at a glance:
Order raw material
The "Order raw material" view: The view
indicates which raw material is missing and needs
to be reordered.

Inventory
You can see how many raw materials were stored
in the high-bay warehouse in the "Inventory"
window. The stock is changed according to the
number and colour if goods are removed.

Order
This window shows how much raw material (blue,
red, white) is in the warehouse. If, for example, a
red workpiece is placed on the shelf, the colour
display and stock value changes.

72
Factory status
The current working status of the overall
factory is displayed in the "Factory status"
window. "Icon is highlighted in blue" will
be displayed if, for example, the vacuum
suction gripper is currently being used.

Production status
In this window, you see the blueprint of the production
process right after you have ordered a workpiece. This
allows you to keep track of where the workpiece
currently is in the factory.

The NFC reader
This window always displays the NFC reader's
current status.
But you can also hang a workpiece and read out the
data of the NFC tag.
Click "Delete" to delete the contents on the NFC tag.

73
Dashboard camera

                     Camera
                     The "Camera" screen displays the camera
                     section of your factory.

                     This corresponds to a live recording of the
                     factory.

                     Camera control

                     This screen gives you the power to control your
                     camera live. You can thus get an overview of
                     the entire factory.

                                 Control the camera
                                 with the virtual joystick. The red dot indicates where the centre of the camera
                                 is. Use the "Step size" button to set the degree by which the camera rotates
                                 when the arrow is clicked. The two red buttons can be used to centre or stop
                                 the camera.

                                 Take a snapshot
                                 The "Snapshot for the Current Image" button lets you place the current image
                                 in the Gallery screen.

                                 Gallery
                                 All the images you have created are
                                 saved in the "Gallery" window. Use the
                                 arrow keys to scroll through the gallery.
                                 The current picture is displayed zoomed.
                                 Click "Delete" to remove an image from
                                 the gallery.
                                  Use the command "Download" to store the image for further use. Specify a storage
                                  location in the context menu that opens.

74
Dashboard Environmental Station

  In addition to the camera function, you can view and process the information
  from the environmental sensor.
  Current air quality

                                                      The "Current air quality" window lets you see a value of the
                                                      air quality, which is indicated by the three rectangles. The
                                                      displays will be switched on depending on the quality of the
                                                      air when it is measured. Green means that the air quality is
                                                      very good; green and yellow indicate that it is good; yellow
                                                      means satisfactory; yellow and red signify that the air quality
                                                      is adequate and red means that the air quality is bad.

  The "More" button (this applies to all
  environmental sensor windows) let's
  you choose between "Graph",
  "Single value" and "Download".

  You will get a graphical representation of the measured values if you select "Graph". Use the scroll
  bar to scroll through all recorded data.

                                              If you select "Download", the data will be downloaded as a .csv file
                                              and can be downloaded and displayed in OpenOffice Calc or Excel.
                                              The data can then be further processed.

  Current brightness
 The "Current brightness" window displays a
 brightness value in %, as well as the time at which the
 measured value was taken. Also visible are the
 brightness variations.

75
    Current air pressure

                                              The "Current air pressure" window displays
                                              the air pressure in hPa (Hecto-Pascal) and
                                              the time at which the measured value was
                                              generated.

    Current humidity

    The "Current humidity" window displays a
    value for relative humidity as a %.

                                                    Current temperature
                                                    The "Current temperature" window displays
                                                    the current temperature (ambient
                                                    temperature) of the measuring sensor in ° C.

    Other buttons
    Use the "Add window" button to add a hidden window. If you
    activate the button, a context menu appears from which you can
    show a dashboard window.

    Use this button to shoot the current window.

    Use this button to zoom the current window to full screen mode.

76
This button shows and hides the left status bar.
The button shows which profile you are logged in under. Clicking on
the arrow will bring up a context menu. Here, you can select
"Profiles" or "Logout". Selecting "Profiles" will open another context
menu in which you can set settings for your profile. Click "Logout" to
log out of the fischertechnik cloud.
A context menu for selecting the language will display if you activate the arrow
that comes after "DE".
The status bar shows three selections that you can activate by clicking on them.
The first two buttons let you choose whether you want to work with the factory
simulation dashboard or just the environmental station dashboard.
Activating the "Settings" button will display a context menu where you can view
and change various parameters relating to your TXT controller.

77
Operating the factory with the fischertechnik cloud
                                       To start factory operation, first load the PLC
                                       program and then set CPU1512SP to RUN.

   This is described in the section Commissioning and adapting the SIMATIC controller CPU1512SP.
   Then start the application on the TXT controller as described here:

                          When the TXT controller is switched on, the
                          program is loaded automatically by "Auto Load,"
                          and just needs to be started by pressing "Start
                          Program" on the touch display.

                          The following application will run on the
                          TXT Controller:
                          "TxtGatewayPLC"

                                                         This application is on the TXT Controller under:
                                                         File - Cloud

    Control at end: The program on the TXT Controller must run. This is recognizable
    by the red symbol on the controller display.

    Then the IOT gateway should be restarted. Do so using the "fischertechnik Node RED Dashboard". In

    the "HMI ­ Main" view, click  in the "Factory Control via OPCUA" window to easily switch the
    power supply on and off.

Once the programs on the PLC, the IOT gateway and the TXT Controller are started, the Training Factory Industry
4.04.0 will be ready for operation.

78
  You will learn to operate the factory and the dashboard by carrying out the
  following tasks.

    Task 1
    Before raw material can be stored in the high-bay warehouse, the
    compartments must be equipped with the supplied empty containers. This is
    the first task you need to perform as a warehouseman.

9x

    Your dashboard looks like this:

    Purchase order                   Raw materials order  Inventory
    Blue, red, white not             No order placed      Inventory empty, since no raw
    available, stock 0                                    materials were stored

    Important note: If this is not the case, you can use
    the included key fob (with integrated NFC tag) to reset
    the dashboard windows to their default settings.
    Alternatively, you can also use the Node-RED
    dashboard

79
Task 2
Order raw material that should be stored in the high-bay warehouse as
stock. To do this, manually store the raw material in the input station.
First, only store a white stone as a workpiece.

                                                      Enter a white stone in the material input.
                                                      The workpiece (raw material) interrupts
                                                      the photoelectric barrier. This process is
                                                      identified as "Inbound Delivery" and
                                                      highlighted in green in the "Production
                                                      Process" dashboard window with the
                                                      "Delivery" icon.
                                 Then the vacuum suction gripper moves to the storage position, picks up the raw
                                 material and moves it to the NFC reader.
                                 The dashboard window displays the
                                 process as follows:
                                 Delivery and vacuum suction grippers
                                 are active and are displayed in green.

                                 At this point, all data is deleted that is located on the NFC tag for the raw
                                 material (already described).

80
                         The raw material colour is determined in the next step. To
                         do this, the vacuum suction gripper moves the raw material
                         over the colour sensor. The data is then available to the
                         NFC reader for further processing. Before the raw material
                         is stored, the determined colour data and further
 information such as delivery data and quality controlling data are written on
 the NFC tag using the NFC reader. Since both factory modules (delivery and
 vacuum pads) are still active, this will continue to be displayed in green on the
 production process dashboard.

                                          This data is displayed in the "NFC Reader" dashboard window.

 What happens next?
                                  The high-bay warehouse provides an empty
                                  container to hold the raw materials. For the raw
                                  material to be placed in the empty container, the
                                  gripper arm moves into the position for an empty
                                  container, picks it up with its slider and deposits it
                                  on the input/output device.

  The container is transported via container to the input position.
                             The vacuum suction arm rotates to the discharge
                             position, moves down and places the raw material
                             into the waiting container.

                            The input/output device then transports the container
                            with the raw material to the high-bay warehouse
                            gripper arm's receiving position. At this point, the
                            container is picked up, transported to the storage
                            location in the high bay and stored there.

81
The "Production process" dashboard window shows the next
steps in the storage process. The icons for all active factory
modules light up in green when the factory modules are in
action.

Look at the following dashboard window - TXT: Order raw material, TXT: Inventory and TXT: Order.
TXT: Order raw material
There are 3 workpieces available for ordering raw materials.
The maximum number of white stones will be reduced by one in the
"TXT: order raw materials" dashboard
window. After you have done this, you will still have two workpieces
available for storing.
TXT: Inventory
You will now see a white stone displayed in the storage system in the
"TXT: Inventory status" dashboard window This means that you can
order this workpiece as a customer and have it processed.

TXT: Purchase order
The dashboard window "TXT: Order" will now be displayed, showing
that there is a white stone in the warehouse and it can be ordered.

82
 Task 3
 Order raw material that is to be stored in the high-bay warehouse as stock.
 To do this, manually store the raw material in the input station.
 Now store a blue stone as a workpiece.
As described in Task 2, insert a blue stone in the high-bay warehouse. The
dashboard will display the results once the foot-away work has been
accomplished.

   Task 4
   Store additional raw materials for storage in the high-bay warehouse. You
   still need two white and one red workpieces.

83
Task 5
Put yourself in the position of a customer, who, for example, would like to
order a white workpiece. Order a white workpiece.

                                          To do this, click on the blue "Purchase order" button in the "TXT: PO"
                                          dashboard window.

                              This happens at the factory: The transport arm of the high-
                              bay warehouse moves into the "white workpiece" insert
                              position.
                              The transport arm picks this up and put it in the high-bay
                              warehouse's in-/output station. From there, it is
                              transported to the receiving position on the vacuum
                              suction gripper.

                              The vacuum suction gripper picks up the workpiece at the
                              picking position and places it on the slider in the kiln.

                              The workpiece is inserted, fired and moved out of the oven
                              again.
                              The available small transport carriage with vacuum
                              suction takes over the transport to the processing
                              machine referred to as the "milling machine".
                              The transport carriage with vacuum suction places
                              the part on the turntable, which then turns it to the
                              milling machine. After the milling process has been
                              carried out, the workpiece is rotated another 90
                              degrees and pneumatically pushed onto a conveyor
                              belt.

84
                              On the way to the sorting device, the workpiece
                              undergoes colour detection.

                              Depending on the detected colour, the workpiece is
                              pushed pneumatically from the conveyor belt on a
                              material chute. The workpiece is located in a
                              receiving area and can be transported from here
                              using the vacuum suction gripper.

                                 The gripper places the workpiece on the NFC reader for
                                 the final inscription. There it is loaded with workpiece-
                                 related data such as the order date, manufacturing or
                                 delivery data.

                              Finally, the workpiece is placed in the output tray at
                              the input-output station.

You can also follow the steps on the dashboard:

Raw material is taken from the high-bay warehouse and fed to the processing
process.

Raw material is processed in the multi-processing station (kiln, milling
machine).
A machined workpiece is sorted by colour and the NFC reader provides it with
workpiece-relevant data.
The workpiece is ready for delivery and can be removed from the system.

85
Task 6
A white stone has accidentally fallen off the high bay and you want to know
what data was written on the NFC tag.
The system must be at rest to do this. Place the workpiece on the NFC
reader and activate the "Read NFC" button in the "TXT: NFC Reader"
dashboard window.

The NFC reader reads the data and displays it in the
dashboard window.
If necessary, you can delete the data using the "Delete NFC"
button.

86
Task 7
Evaluate data from your environmental station. To do this, first show the data
in the graph area of the dashboard view. Save the data as a
.csv file and use it in a spreadsheet program.
Determine data on
brightness of the environment in
your factory.

+
Determine current temperature data for your factory and edit in
a spreadsheet program.

Determine the humidity values over a longer period of time and
have them displayed graphically on the dashboard.

87
Task 8
Use the built-in camera to monitor your factory. Move the camera around your
factory and take 2 pictures of the factory. Save an image for documentation.
Delete unnecessary pictures from the gallery.

To move the camera, use the "TXT:
Camera control" dashboard window.
The buttons used for this task have already been explained
previously in the description of the dashboard.
Move the camera around your factory. Move the vertical and
horizontal axes of your camera using the "blue arrow buttons".
The factory section that the camera is currently recording is also
displayed in the "TXT: Camera" dashboard window.

Select three pictures and save them in the "TXT: Gallery"
dashboard window. Use the "Take snapshot for the current
image" button.
Select 1 picture from the gallery, one that you would like to further
process in an image editing program. To do this, click on the
"Download" button
. A context menu appears in which you specify the storage
location and the file name.
Click the "Delete" button to delete unwanted pictures.

88
    Training Factory Industry 4.0fischertechnik Node-RED dashboard
    The fischertechnik Node-RED dashboard is designed to be a local HMI operating interface (Human
    Machine Interface) in a local network (LAN). It can be started easily in a web browser (recommended:
    Firefox or Chrome) by entering:

    192.168.0.5:1880/ui

    (IP address of the IoT gateway: Port 1880 / ui as the name of the application)

    The following views are available here:
    HMI ­ Main
    The camera image and the workpieces stored in the high-bay warehouse are displayed in this menu.

    In the "Factory Control via OPCUA" window, you can click  to reset assignment of the high-bay
    warehouse.

    Click  to acknowledge errors in the Training Factory Industry 4.04.0.

    Click  to restart the IOT gateway. This is required when the PLC program has been restarted.

89
   HMI ­ HBW Positions
   The positions of the stacker crane in the automated high-bay warehouse station (HBW) can be calibrated
   and monitored in this menu.

   HMI ­ VGR Positions
   The positions of the 3-axis robot in the vacuum suction gripper (VGR) station can be calibrated and
   monitored in this menu.

90
   HMI ­ SSC Positions
   The positions of the camera in the sensor station with camera (SSC) can be calibrated and monitored in
   this menu.

   HMI - Calibration
   The colour sensors in the sensor station with camera (SSC) and the colour sensor and positions on the
   sorting line with colour detection (SLD) can be calibrated in this menu.

91
    HMI ­ Config Data

    After calibrating the colour sensors and positions, the data in the "Save Data" window from the PLC can

    be stored in a *.csv file  in this menu.

    The calibration data from a *.csv file can be loaded  to the PLC in the "Load Data" window.

    ft Cloud
    The fischertechnik cloud can be accessed in this menu. There must be an internet connection to do so.

92
   Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 ­ Overview
   The camera image and the sensor data are displayed in this menu.
   In addition, a camera controller is available in the "Camera Control" window.
   An order for a white, red, or blue workpiece can be executed in the "Order" window.
   Errors can be acknowledged and commands to delete, read and write NFC tags can be executed in the
   "Factory Control" window.

   Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 ­ Graph
   Graphs for environmental data can be accessed in different windows in this menu.

93
    Calibrating the system in the Training Factory Industry 4.0fischertechnik Node-RED Dashboard

    If positions in the individual factory modules are no longer correct, or if the colour sensors need to be
    recalibrated, this can be completed in the fischertechnik Node-RED dashboard of the Learning Factory.

    Calibrating the colour sensors:

    The colour sensors are calibrated in the "Colour sensor calibration" window in the dashboard under
    "HMI - Calibration".

                                     The process is started by activating "Calibrate colour
                                     sensor" and selecting the relevant colour sensor.
                                     Here, for example, this is "DSI".

                                     - DSI stands for the colour sensor on the input / output
                                     station

                                     - SLD stands for the colour sensor on the sorting station

                                     First, place the white workpiece in the centre of the

                                     sensor and confirm the value by clicking  , then

                                     place the red workpiece and confirm by clicking

                                     and finally place the blue workpiece and

                                     confirm by clicking  .

                                     Finally, click          to calculate threshold
                                     values.

                                     Note: At the end, do not forget to deactivate "Calibrate
                                     colour sensor" .

    Calibration of colour sensors in the sorting station (SLD) is completed in the same way, although in this
    case each workpiece is placed on the start of the belt for measurement. The conveyor belt then
    transports the workpiece past the colour sensor to the light barrier behind the colour sensor.

94
    Calibrating positions on the sorting line with colour detection (SLD):

    The positions to push out the workpieces in the sorting line with colour detection (SLD) are calibrated in
    the "SLD push out counter" window in the dashboard under "HMI - calibration".

                                                                    The process is started by activating "Calibrate
                                                                    push out" .

                                                                    Then, first test whether the current positions are
                                                                    correct for all 3 colours (white/red/blue).

                                                                    Do so by placing the workpieces on the start of the
                                                                    conveyor belt. The conveyor belt will then
                                                                    transport the workpiece past the colour sensor to
                                                                    the set positions on the relevant ejection point. The
                                                                    part is ejected there.

    If the position is not correct, it can be corrected and adopted by clicking  . Then the test

    should be completed again. Repeat this process as long as necessary for all 3 colours

    (white/red/blue) until the positions are correct.

    Note: At the end, do not forget to deactivate "Calibrate push out" .

95
    Calibrating a position on the sensor station with camera (SSC):

    The camera positions in the sensor station with camera (SSC) are calibrated in the windows "move to
    position", "Position Centre" and "Position HBW" in the dashboard under "HMI - SSC Positions".

                                                               The process is started by activating
                                                               "Activate pos. move" .

                                                               Then, one of the two positions "Centre"
                                                               (central position looking toward the vacuum
                                                               suction gripper) or "HBW" as shown here
                                                               (position with view of the high-bay
                                                               warehouse) can be selected.

           Clicking                                  will cause the camera to

           move first to the reference position (0/0) and

           then to the position "HBW".

           Test both positions.

    If one of the positions is not correct, it can be corrected in the "Position Centre" or "Position HBW"
    windows. Then the test should be completed again.

    Repeat this process until all positions are correct.

    Click  to move to the reference position (0/0).

    Note: At the end, do not forget to deactivate "Activate pos. move" .

96
    Calibrating a position for the vacuum suction gripper (VGR):

    The positions of the 3-axis robot in the vacuum suction gripper station (VGR) are calibrated in the
    dashboard under "HMI - VGR Positions". Here, there are the window "move to position" and 13 windows
    for the positions

    "Position Colour Reader", "Position DSI
    collect", "Position DSI discard",
    "Position DSO collect", "Position DSO
    discard", "Position HBW collect",
    "Position HBW discard", "Position
    MPO", "Position NFC", "Position NOK",
    "Position SLD white", "Position SLD red"
    and "Position SLD blue".

    The process is started by activating "Activate
    pos. move" .

    Then one of the positions, for example position
    "DSO discard" can be selected.

    Click       to cause the 3-axis robot to

    move first to the reference position (0/0/0) and

    then to a position above (offset by the value

    Offset) the position "DSO discard".

    Click       and it will move to the final

    position, then back to the reference position

    (0/0/0).

    The button  is non-functional here.

    Test all 13 positions in this way.

97
                                                       If one of the positions is not correct,
                                                       it can be corrected in the position
                                                       windows, here for example "Position
                                                       DSO". Then the test should be
                                                       completed again.

                                                       Repeat this process until all positions
                                                       are correct.

    Click  to move to the reference position (0/0/0).

    Note: At the end, do not forget to deactivate "Activate pos. move" .

    Calibrating a position for the automated high-bay warehouse (HBW):
    The positions of the stacker crane in the automated high-bay warehouse station (HBW)
    are calibrated in the dashboard under "HMI - HBW Positions". Here, there are the
    window "move to position" and 5 windows for the positions
    "Position Belt",
    "Position Rack"
    with the offset for the rack,
    "Position Rack Row A",
    "Position Rack Row B",
    and
    "Position Rack Row C",

    Only the positions Rack A1, Rack B2 and Rack C3 are approached and calibrated in the warehouse.
    The other 6 position values are calculated on this basis.

98
           The process is started by activating "Activate pos.
           move" .

           Then one of the positions, for example position "Rack
           B2" (position B2 in the warehouse) can be selected.

           Clicking               will cause the stacker crane to

           move first to the reference position (0/0/Cantilever rear)

           and then to the position "Rack B2" before the

           warehouse.

           Click       to move the cantilever into the
           warehouse.

           Click       to move the stacker crane up by the

           value offset to lift a pallet.

           Click       once again to move the stacker crane

           back down by the value offset, then move the cantilever

           in and finally back to the reference position

           (0/0/Cantilever rear)

    Test all 3 positions in the warehouse (A1, B2, C3) and the positions on the belt.

                       If one of the positions is not correct, this
                       can be corrected in the position windows,
                       here for example"Position Rack Row B"
                       (Position Rack B2). Then the test should
                       be completed again.

                       Repeat this process until all positions are
                       correct.

    Click  to move to the reference position (0/0/Cantilever rear).

    Note: At the end, do not forget to deactivate "Activate pos. move" .

99
 Components description

  The most important components of the factory modules are described on the following pages.

  Actuators

  Both encoder motors and fischertechnik-specific mini motors are installed in
  the individual stations.
  Encoder motor:
  The encoder motors are permanently energised DC motors. The encoder
  motors used here can be used to determine paths with a quadrature
  encoder (signal A, B).
  The encoder motors operate at a nominal voltage of 24 VDC and have a
  maximum power of 0.9 W and at a maximum speed of 200 RPMs. Power
  consumption at maximum power is 180 mA.
  The encoders generate 3 pulses per rotation of the motor shaft. The
  integrated transmission has a ration of 20.4:1. Therefore, one rotation of
  the shaft coming out of the transmission corresponds to 61.2 pulses of
  the encoder.
  A four-wire cable is used to connect the encoder.

100
Mini motor

If conveyor belts or processing machines are used in the individual stations,
they are driven by a mini-motor. This compact motor is a permanently
energised DC motor that can be used in conjunction with a plug-in U
transmission
. The motor's rated voltage is 24 V and the current consumption is a maximum
of 400 mA. The motor has a maximum torque of 6.92 mNm and an idling speed
of 10,910 RPMs. The U-transmission has a ratio of 64.8: 1 and a lateral output.

Compressor:

A diaphragm pump is used if a compressed air source is required at the
stations.

Such a diaphragm pump consists of two chambers, which are separated by           Crankshaft
a membrane (see Figure 1). In one of these two chambers, a piston is moved
back and forth by an eccentric, which reduces or increases the volume in
the other chamber. When the piston moves to the right, the diaphragm is
pulled back, sucking air into the second chamber via the inlet valve. If the
piston moves to the left,
the diaphragm pushes the air out of the pump head via the outlet valve. The
compressor here uses a rated voltage of 24 VDC and generates an
overpressure of 0.7 bar. The compressor's maximum current consumption is
36 mA.

                               Piston
                                        A/exhaust valve

             Cover  Diaphragm                                                    Figure 1

101
3/2-way solenoid valve:
3/2-way solenoid valves are used to control the pneumatic cylinders. These
switching valves have three connections and two switching states. A coil (a)
that works against a spring (c) carries out the switching operations. When a
voltage is applied to the coil, the coil's mounted core (b), which is mounted so
that it can slide, moves against the spring and thereby opens the valve due to
the Lorentz force.
In this case, opening means that the compressed air
connection (current designation: 1, old name: P) is connected
to the cylinder port (2, formerly A). If this voltage drops, the
spring pushes the core back and closes the valve again. In
this position, the cylinder port (2, formerly A) is connected to
the vent (3, formerly R). The figure shows a schematic
representation of the 3/2-way solenoid valve.

102
Pneumatic cylinders:
The factory has a total of 5 single-acting cylinders with spring installed. These are
controlled by the 3/2-way solenoid valves. A piston divides the volume of the
cylinder into two chambers on pneumatic cylinders. A pressure difference
between these two chambers results in a force that acts on the piston, thereby
displacing it. This shift corresponds to a volume change in both chambers.
Installing a return spring saves on a second air connection with 3/2-way valve.
When the 3/2-way solenoid valve is opened, the air produced in the compressor
flows to port 1 on the cylinder and pushes the piston forward against the spring
force. To do this, the piston rod extends forwards. When the solenoid valve closes
the air supply, the spring pushes the piston back to the initial position.

Vacuum cups:

The suction function on the vacuum suction device is achieved by using two
pneumatic cylinders which are controlled by means of a 3/2-way solenoid valve.
In order to generate a negative pressure, i.e., a pressure which is lower than the
ambient pressure, two cylinders are mechanically coupled in the vacuum gripper.
If a cylinder is then subjected to overpressure, both piston rods extend, resulting
in an increase in volume in the chamber that the vacuum closes. This increase in
volume causes a pressure drop in this chamber.

Mini-button:

Mini-pushbuttons are used as reference switches. They are used for position
determination using a point-to-point movement, for example, at the turntable. The
miniature pushbutton used here is equipped with a changeover contact and can
be used both as a normally closed contact and as a make contact.
Pressing the button creates a conductive connection between
contact 1 and contact 3, whereas the connection between contact 1
and contact 2 is disconnected. The figure shows the schematic circuit
diagram of the mini-pushbutton.

103
LED
An LED is an electronic component which converts electrical energy into light. The abbreviation LED stems
from the English "Light Emitting Diode".
LED for creating light in a light barrier and as a lamp
This LED's light frequency controls a photo-resistor. The "+" and "L" identify the module.
Another feature is the vitreous body. It bundles rays, so that the light beams hit the photo-
transistor in parallel to one another, and not scattered.

Sensors

Photo-transistor
Photo-transistors are electronic components that react to light. Photo-transistors
usually only have two connections, the collector and the emitter. The base is replaced
by the incident light. Light from the LED that hits the photo-transistor switches the
current flow. This behaviour can be evaluated using program technology.

Photo-resistor
A photo-resistor is an electronic component whose electrical resistance changes when
light strikes it. In many descriptions you will also find the name LDR. This term comes from
the English word, "light-dependent resistor".
Important: The photo-resistor has a resistance value of
0 - >1MOhm (in complete darkness). The TXT Controller software lets you read a maximum value of 15,000
sensors

104
Environment sensor
                         The sensor, which is located on a
                         circuit board in the housing, is used
                         to measure gas, air pressure,
                         humidity and air temperature. The
                         component is

  connected to the TXT controller via a ribbon cable.

  The data is continuously measured and stored in a CSV file that can be opened in Excel, for example. The
  values can be viewed in the fischertechnik cloud.
  These images show a part of the dashboard of the environmental station.

Colour sensor
Colour sensors are used in the automation technology to check the colour or
a colour print. For example, this is done to ensure that the correct components
were installed. The fischertechnik colour sensor emits white light, which
different colour surfaces reflect to different degrees. The photo-transistor is
used to measure the intensity of reflected light and
a voltage value between 0 V and 9 V is output. The measured value depends on
the ambient brightness as well as the distance of the sensor from the coloured
surface. The connection is made via three cables. The red cable is attached to a
9V output (generated from 24V), the green cable is connected to ground, and the
black cable for the measured value is connected to a 0-10V analogue input on the
PLC. This measured value (0-9 V) is digitised into a whole number between 0 and
24883.

105
NFC-Tags NTAG213 22mm

Each workpiece has its own unique ID and displays the following data: Status,
colour and time stamp from delivery to dispatch. This information is saved on the
tags. The tags are integrated into the workpiece, which lets them be used directly.

PN532 V3 NFC-reader

This component describes and reads out the NFC-tags.
The production view on the NFC/RFID reader displays the
workpiece data and can be used to read or delete
workpieces manually. The raw data on the
 NFC tags can be read out using a standard NFC app from mobile devices with NFC readers. The NFC-
reader is connected to an I²C interface and a 3.3 V power supply at the EXT connection on the TXT
controller.

nano Router TP-Link

The connection to the fischertechnik cloud is established via the WiFi
router supplied and integrated into the learning factory. We recommend
using the web browsers such as Chrome or Firefox. The cloud can be
used via a personal access, which is created once
(www.fischertechnik-cloud.com). The cloud servers
are located in Germany and ensure that strict European requirements apply to data storage.

Personal data is protected in an account with password access that uses extremely secure "OAuth2"
industry standard. All data sent to the cloud is transmitted encrypted with certificates (https standard, green
lock in web browser).

Camera

        The surveillance camera mounted on the multi-processing
        station (MPO) is connected to the TXT controller via a USB
        interface. It can be controlled using the dashboard in the
        fischertechnik cloud.

106
TXT controller
The complete performance data for the TXT controller can be viewed at
www.fischertechnik.de/simulieren, here are the most important features:
· Dual Processor: ARM Cortex A8 (32-bit/600MHz) + Cortex M3
· Storage capacity: 256 MB DDR3 RAM, 128 MB Flash
· Storage extension: Micro SD card slot
· Display: colour 2.4-inch touch display (320x240 pixels) 8 universal inputs: Digital/Analogue 0-

     9VDC, Analogue 0-5 k
· Display: colour 2.4" touch display (320x240 pixels)
· 4 quick counter inputs: Digital, frequency up to 1 kHz
· 4 motor outputs 9 V/250 mA (max.: 800 mA): Infinitely variable speed, short-circuit-proof,

     alternatively 8 individual outputs, e.g. for lamps
· Combined Bluetooth/WiFi wireless module: BT 2.1 EDR+ 4.0, WiFi 802.11 b/g/n
· Infrared receiver diode
· USB 2.0 client: Mini USB port for connection with the PC
· USB Host port: USB-A port for fischertechnik USB camera, USB sticks, etc.
· Camera interface: via USB host, Linux camera drivers integrated in the operating system
· 10-pole pin row to increase inputs and outputs as well as I2C-port
· Integrated loudspeaker
· Integrated real-time clock with replaceable buffer battery for recording the measured values

     in a defined period
· Linux based Open-Source operating system
· Programming possible with ROBO Pro, C-Compiler, PC-Library, etc.
· Power supply: 9V DC 3.45 mm port, or fischertechnik 2.5 mm ports

107
24V adapter board
There is an adapter board on every Factory module for connecting to the PLC; it is structured as follows:

                                                 Header for connecting model

                             V1 V2 V3 V4                  Relay for
                                                          Bi-directional
     Terminals for                                        Motors
     Valves

                    17x2 header for connecting PLC (ST1)  Terminals to connect PLC
                                                          (alternative to ST1)

PLC / controller system requirements:

If a different controller besides a PLC SIMATIC S7-1500 is used, such as an Arduino, the following requirements

must be fulfilled.

-    Interface to the adapter board compatible with 24V

-    Maximum cycle time of 10 ms

108
Assigning the 17x2 header (ST1) for PLC connection:

                                       Terminals

              +24V (actuators)     1                 2    +24V (sensors)
                      0V (GND)                            0V (GND)
                               I1  3                 4    I2
                               I3                         I4
                               I5  5                 6    I6
                               I7                         I8
                              ...  7                 8    ...

                              Q1   9                 10   Q2
                              Q3                          Q4
                              Q5   11                12   Q6
                              Q7                          Q8
                              ...  13                14   ...

                            GND    15                16   GND

                                   17                18

                                   19                20

                                   21                22

                                   23                24

                                   25                26

                                   27                28

                                   29                30

                                   31                32

                                   33                34

Assigning the adapter boards to the individual stations:

              High-bay    Vacuum         Processing       Sorting line    Sensor station
              warehouse   suction        Station (MPO)    (SLD)           with camera
              (HBW)       Gripper (VGR)  Turntable        -               (SSC)
                          Vertical       -                -               Camera height
     R1/R2 Conveyor belt  Horizontal     Oven pusher      -               Turn camera
                          Turntable      Gripper          -
     R3/R4 Horizontal     -              Vacuum           White ejector   10 pin
                          -              Lower            Red ejector     14 pin
     R5/R6 Vertical       -              Oven door        Blue ejector    10 pin
                          -              Slides           -               34 pin
     R7/R8 Cantilever     Vacuum
                                         20 pin           20 pin
     V1       -           16 pin
                                         20 pin           14 pin
     V2       -           10 pin
                                         34 pin           34 pin
     V3       -           34 pin

     V4       -

     ST

     (Model) 20 pin

     ST

     (Model) 14 pin

     ST

     (Model)

     ST1

     (PLC) 34 pin

109
Pulse width modulation:

Bi-directional motors are converted via a relay and can be supplied either via 24V (actuators) or the associated
PWM terminal.

The jumpers are on the adapter board

            High-bay       Vacuum suction Processing station Sorting line            Sensor station with
            warehouse                                                                camera (SSC)
            (HBW)          gripper (VGR) (MPO)                  (SLD)
            Conveyor belt                                                            - not assigned -
     PWM 1                 Y(Vertical)    Turntable             - not assigned -     Camera height
     PWM 2  X(Horizontal)  Z(Horizontal)  - not assigned -      - not assigned -     Turn camera
     PWM 3                 X(Turn)        - not assigned -      - not assigned -     - not assigned -
     PWM 4  Y(Vertical)                   Suction (Horizontal)  - not assigned -

            Cantilever

Assigning the PWM jumper:
Jumper left: PWM selected, motor converted via relay and
Supplied with power via the associated PWM terminal
Jumper right: Power supply via +24V (actuators), motor can be converted via a relay

110
     Factory module assignment plans

     Assignment plan for the vacuum suction gripper

Terminal   Function                     Designation  Clam I/O address Variable name
no. (ST1)                                            p PLC S7-1500 S7-1500
1          Power supply (+) actuators   24V DC
2          Power supply (+) sensors     24V DC       DI1.6  %I1.6  IX_VGR_RefSwitchVerticalAxis_I1
3          Power supply (-)             0V           DI3.6  %I3.6  IX_VGR_RefSwitchHorizontalAxis_I2
4          Power supply (-)             0V           DI3.7  %I3.7  IX_VGR_RefSwitchRotate_I3
5          Vertical reference switch    I1           DI6.0  %I6.0  IX_VGR_EncoderVerticalAxisImp1_B1
6          Horizontal reference switch  I2           DI6.4  %I6.4  IX_VGR_EncoderVerticalAxisImp2_B2
7          Turn reference switch        I3           DI6.1  %I6.1  IX_VGR_EncoderHorizontalAxisImp1_B3
9          Encoder vertical pulse 1     B1           DI6.5  %I6.5  IX_VGR_EncoderHorizontalAxisImp2_B4
10         Encoder vertical pulse 2     B2           DI6.2  %I6.2  IX_VGR_EncoderRotateImp1_B5
11         Encoder horizontal pulse 1   B3           DI6.6  %I6.6  IX_VGR_EncoderRotateImp2_B6
12         Encoder horizontal pulse 2   B4           DO2.0  %Q2.0  QX_VGR_M1_VerticalAxisUp_Q1
13         Turn encoder pulse 1         B5           DO2.1  %Q2.1  QX_VGR_M1_VerticalAxisDown_Q2
14         Turn encoder pulse 2         B6           DO2.2  %Q2.2  QX_VGR_M2_HorizontalAxisBackward_Q3
17         Vertical motor up            Q1 (M1)      DO2.3  %Q2.3  QX_VGR_M2_HorizontalAxisForward_Q4
18         Vertical motor down          Q2 (M1)      DO2.4  %Q2.4  QX_VGR_M3_RotateClockwise_Q5
19         Horizontal motor backwards   Q3 (M2)      DO2.5  %Q2.5  QX_VGR_M3_RotateCounterclockwise_Q6
20         Horizontal motor forwards    Q4 (M2)      DO2.6  %Q2.6  QX_VGR_Compressor_Q7
21         Turn motor clockwise         Q5 (M3)      DO2.7  %Q2.7  QX_VGR_ValveVacuum_Q8
22         Turn motor anti-clockwise    Q6(M3)       DO8.0  %QW15  QW_VGR_PWM_Vertical_M1
23         Compressor                   Q7           DO8.1  %QW17  QW_VGR_PWM_Horizontal_M2
24         Valve vacuum                 Q8           DO8.2  %QW19  QW_VGR_PWM_Rotate_M3
25         PWM horizontal               PWM (M1)
26         PWM vertical                 PWM (M2)
27         Turn PWM                     PWM (M3)

111
Model wiring

Terminal  Header ST1                           Ribbon cable  Sensors + actuators model
17        Vertical up                      1                 Q1/Q2 (M1)
18        Vertical down                    2
3.4       GND                              3                 Encoder     power              supply
2         24V (Sensor)                     4                 Signal                               A
9         A                                5                 Signal B
10        B                                6
5         Reference vertical               7                 I1
2         24V                              8                 Q3/Q4 (M2)
19        Horizontal back                  9
20        Horizontal forward               10                Encoder     power              supply
3.4       GND                              11                Signal                               A
2         24V (Sensor)                     12                Signal B
11        A                                13
12        B                                14                I2
6         Reference horizontal             15
2         24V (Sensor)                     16

          Header ST2

7         Turn reference                   1                 I3

2         24V (Sensor)                     2

21        Turn clockwise                   3                 Q5/Q6 (M3)

22        Turn anti-clockwise              4

3.4       GND                              5

2         24V (Sensor)                     6                 Encoder     power              supply
                                                             Signal                               A
13        A                                7
                                                             Signal B

14        B                                8

3.4       GND                              9
                                                                           Q7 (compressor)
23        Compressor
                                           10

 3.4                                                         Q8 (Valve vacuum)
                   Terminal V4

 24

red = power supply
yellow = Motor poles reversible via relay

112
Assignment plan for automated high-bay warehouse (HBW)                           Q5/Q6 + B3/B4
                                                                           I4
                                                                                       Q7/Q8
                                             Q1/Q2                                        I5
                                                                             I5          I2

          Q3/Q4 + B1/B2

Terminal   Function                       Designation  Clamp  I/O address Variable name
no. (ST1)                                              SPS
1          Power supply (+) actuators     24V DC              S7-1500            S7-1500
2          Power supply (+) sensors       24V DC       DI1.0
3          Power supply (-)               0V                  %I1.0              IX_HBW_RefSwitchHorizontalAxis_I1
4          Power supply (-)               0V           DI1.1  %I1.1
           Reference pushbutton                        DI1.2  %I1.2              IX_HBW_LightBarrierInside_I2
5          horizontal                     I1           DI1.3  %I1.3              IX_HBW_LightBarrierOutside_I3
           Light barrier inside                        DI5.1  %I5.1              IX_HBW_RefSwitchVerticalAxis_I4
6          Light barrier outside          I2           DI5.5  %I5.5              IX_HBW_EncoderHorizontalAxisImp1_B1
7          Reference pushbutton vertical  I3           DI5.2  %I5.2              IX_HBW_EncoderHorizontalAxisImp2_B2
8          Encoder horizontal pulse 1     I4           DI5.6  %I5.6              IX_HBW_EncoderVerticalAxisImp1_B3
11         Encoder horizontal pulse 2     B1           DI1.4                     IX_HBW_EncoderVerticalAxisImp2_B4
12         Encoder vertical pulse 1       B2                  %I1.4              IX_HBW_SwitchCantileverFront_I5
13         Encoder vertical pulse 2       B3           DI1.5
14         Reference pushbutton probe     B4                  %I1.5              IX_HBW_SwitchCantileverBack_I6
           arm front                                   DO1.0  %Q1.0
15         Reference pushbutton probe     I5           DO1.1  %Q1.1              QX_HBW_M1_ConveyorBeltForward_Q1
           arm rear                                    DO1.2  %Q1.2              QX_HBW_M1_ConveyorBeltBackward_Q2
16         Conveyor belt motor forwards   I6           DO1.3                     QX_HBW_M2_HorizontalTowardsRack_Q3
           Conveyor belt motor backwards                      %Q1.3              QX_HBW_M2_HorizontalTowardsConveyorB
17         Motor horizontal towards rack  Q1 (M1)      DO1.4  %Q1.4              elt_Q4
18         Motor horizontal towards       Q2 (M1)      DO1.5  %Q1.5              QX_HBW_M3_VerticalAxisDownward_Q5
19         conveyor belt                  Q3 (M2)      DO1.6  %Q1.6              QX_HBW_M3_VerticalAxisUpward_Q6
           Vertical motor down                         DO1.7  %Q1.7              QX_HBW_M4_CantileverForward_Q7
20         Vertical motor up              Q4 (M2)      DO7.0  %QW7               QX_HBW_M4_CantileverBackward_Q8
           Cantilever motor forwards                   DO7.1  %QW9               QW_HBW_PWM_ConveyorBelt_M1
21         Cantilever motor backwards     Q5 (M3)      DO7.2  %QW11              QW_HBW_PWM_HorizontalAxis_M2
22         PWM conveyor belt              Q6 (M3)      DO7.3  %QW13              QW_HBW_PWM_VerticalAxis_M3
23         PWM horizontal                 Q7 (M4)                                QW_HBW_PWM_Cantilever_M4
24         PWM vertical                   Q8 (M4)
25         PWM cantilever                 PWM (M1)
26                                        PWM (M2)
27                                        PWM (M3)
28                                        PWM (M4)

113
Model wiring

Terminal  Header ST1                             Ribbon cable  Sensors + actuators model
5                                                              I1
2         Reference horizontal               1                 I2
6                                                              I3
2         24V (Sensor)                       2                 Q1/Q2 (M1)
7                                                              reserved
2         Photo-transistor internal          3
17
18        24V (Sensor)                       4
3.4
2         Photo-transistor external          5
9
10        24V (Sensor)                       6
3.4
2         Conveyor belt forwards             7
19
          Conveyor belt backwards            8
20
3.4       GND                                9
2
11        9V (generated from 24V sensor)     10
12
          reserved                           11
8
2         reserved                           12
21
22        GND                                13                Lights
3.4                                                            for light barrier
2         24V (Sensor)                       14
13                                                             Q3/Q4 (M2)
14        Motor horizontal towards rack      15
                                                               Horizontal
15        Motor horizontal towards conveyor                    power
2                                                              Signal
23        belt                               16                Signal B
24
          GND                                17                I4
16
2         24V (Sensor)                       18                Q6/Q7 (M3)                 encoder
                                                                                            supply
          A                                  19                Vertical                           A
                                                               power
          B                                  20                Signal                     encoder
                                                               Signal B                     supply
          Header ST2                                           I5                                 A

          Reference pushbutton vertical      1                 Q7/Q8 (M4)

          24V (Sensor)                       2                 I6

          Vertical axis down                 3

          Vertical axis up                   4

          GND                                5

          24V (Sensor)                       6

          A                                  7

          B                                  8

          Reference pushbutton probe arm

          forward                            9

          24V (Sensor)                       10

          Probe arm forward                  11

          Probe arm back                     12

          Reference pushbutton probe arm

          rear                               13

          24V (Sensor)                       14

red = power supply
yellow = Motor poles reversible via relay

114
     Assignment plan for the multi-processing station with kiln (MPO)

     I9                                Q10
                 I1                                               Q4

                                                                          O14

     I8

         Q7/Q8                         I4                             Q3

                      I1                                      I2
                                   I3

Not shown: Q1, Q2, Q5, Q6, Q9, Q11, Q12, Q13, I4, I5, I6, I7

115
Terminal   Function                  Designation  Clamp  I/O address Variable name
no. (ST1)                                         SPS
1                                    24V DC              S7-1500  S7-1500
                                     24V DC       DI1.7
2          Power supply (+)          0V
3                                    0V           DI2.0
4          actuators                 I1
                                                  DI2.1
5          Power supply (+)          I2
                                                  DI2.2
6          sensors                   I3
                                                  DI2.3
7          Power supply (-)          I4
                                                  DI2.4
8          Power supply (-)          I5           DI2.5
                                                  DI2.6
9          Reference switch          I6           DI2.7
                                     I7           DO3.0
10         turntable (suction        I8           DO3.1
                                     I9           DO3.2
11         position)                 Q1 (M1)      DO3.3  %I1.7    IX_MPO_RefSwitchTurnTable_PosVac_I1
                                     Q2 (M1)      DO3.4
12         Reference switch          Q3 (M2)      DO3.5
13                                   Q4 (M3)      DO3.6
17         turntable (conveyor       Q5 (M4)      DO3.7
                                     Q6 (M4)      DO4.0
18         belt position)            Q7 (M5)      DO4.1  %I2.0    IX_MPO_RefSwitchTurnTable_PosBelt_I2
                                     Q8 (M5)      DO4.2  %I2.1    IX_MPO_LightBarrierEndOfConBelt_I3
19         Light barrier end of      Q9           DO4.3
20                                   Q10          DO4.4
21         conveyor belt             Q11          DO4.5
                                     Q12          DO9.0
22         Reference switch          Q13          DO9.1
                                     Q14
23         turntable           (saw  PWM (M1)
                                     PWM (M5)
24         position)                                     %I2.2    IX_MPO_RefSwitchTurnTable_PosSaw_I4
25
26         Reference switch
27
28         suction (turntable
29
30         position)                                     %I2.3    IX_MPO_RefSwitchVac_PosTurnTable_I5
31
32         Reference switch                              %I2.4    IX_MPO_RefSwitchOvenFeederInside_I6

           oven feeder inside                            %I2.5    IX_MPO_RefSwitchOvenFeederOutside_I7

           Reference switch                              %I2.6    IX_MPO_RefSwitchVac_PosOven_I8
                                                         %I2.7    IX_MPO_LightBarrierOven_I9
           oven feeder outside
                                                         %Q3.0    QX_MPO_M1_TurnTableClockwise_Q1
           Reference switch
                                                         %Q3.1    QX_MPO_M1_TurnTableCounterclockwise_Q2
           vacuum (kiln position)
                                                         %Q3.2    QX_MPO_M2_ConveyorBeltForward_Q3
           Light barrier kiln                            %Q3.3    QX_MPO_M3_Saw_Q4

           Turn motor turntable                          %Q3.4    QX_MPO_M4_OvenFeederRetract_Q5

           clockwise                                     %Q3.5    QX_MPO_M4_OvenFeederExtend_Q6

           Turn motor slewing                            %Q3.6    QX_MPO_M5_VacuumTowardsOven_Q7

           ring anti-clockwise                           %Q3.7    QX_MPO_M5_VacuumTowardsTurnTable_Q8
                                                         %Q4.0    QX_MPO_LightOven_Q9
           Conveyor belt motor                           %Q4.1    QX_MPO_Compressor_Q10
                                                         %Q4.2    QX_MPO_ValveVacuum_Q11
           forwards                                      %Q4.3    QX_MPO_ValveLowering_Q12
                                                         %Q4.4    QX_MPO_ValveOvenDoor_Q13
           Motor saw                                     %Q4.5    QX_MPO_ValveFeeder_Q14
                                                         %QW23    QW_MPO_PWM_TurnTable_M1
           Retract oven feeder                           %QW25    QW_MPO_PWM_Vacuum_M5

           motor

           Extend oven feeder

           motor

           Vacuum towards oven

           motor

           Vacuum towards

           turntable motor

           Lamp kiln

           Compressor

           Valve vacuum

           Valve lowering

           Valve kiln door

           Valve feeder

           PWM turntable

           PWM vacuum

116
Model wiring

Terminal Header ST1                          Ribbon cable  Sensors + actuators on model
                                                           I1
5    Turntable reference button      1                     I2
                                                           I3
2    24V (Sensor)                    2                     Q1/Q2 (M1)
                                                           Light barrier lamp
6    Turntable reference button      3                     I5
                                                           I4
2    24V (Sensor)                    4                     Q3 (M2)
                                                           Q4 (M3)
7    Light barrier end of conveyor belt 5
                                                           Q5/Q6 (M4)
2    24V (Sensor)                    6                     I6
                                                           I7
17   Turn motor turntable clockwise  7                     I8
                                                           Q7/Q8(M5)
18   Turn turntable anti-clockwise   8                     Q9 (oven light
                                                           Q10 (compressor)
3.4  GND                             9                     I9
                                                           Light barrier lamp
2    24V (Sensor)                    10

9    Vacuum reference button         11

2    24V (Sensor)                    12

8    Turntable reference button pos. saw 13

2    24V (Sensor)                    14

3.4  GND                             15

19   Conveyor belt                   16

3.4  GND                             17

20   Saw                             18

     not assigned                    19

     not assigned                    20

     ST2

     not assigned                    1

     not assigned                    2

21   Retract oven feeder             3

22   Extend oven feeder              4

10   Oven feeder inside              5

2    24V (Sensor)                    6

11   Oven feeder outside             7

2    24V (Sensor)                    8

12   Vacuum on oven                  9

2    24V (Sensor)                    10

23   Vacuum to oven                  11

24   Vacuum to turntable             12

3.4  GND                             13

25   Lamp kiln                       14

3.4  GND                             15

26   Compressor                      16

13   Oven light barrier              17

2    24V (Sensor)                    18

3.4  GND                             19

2    24V (Sensor)                    20

117
3.4  Terminal V1                           Q11 (Valve vacuum)
                                           Q12 (lower valve)
27                                         Q13 (oven door valve)
                                           Q14 (feeder valve)
3.4  Terminal V2

28

3.4  Terminal V3

29

3.4
               Terminal V4

30

red = power supply
yellow = Motor poles reversible via relay

118
Assignment plan for the sorting line using colour recognition (SLD)

                    I3
            A4

        Q2
I2

  I1                                                                        I7

Coupling to the multi-                                         I6
 processing station                                  I5
  Not shown: Q1, Q3, Q4, Q5

Terminal   Function              Designation  Clamp  I/O address Variable name
no. (ST1)                                     SPS
1          Power supply (+)      24V DC              S7-1500  S7-1500
           actuators                          DI3.0
2          Power supply (+)      24V DC       DI3.1  %I3.0    IX_SLD_PulseCounter_I1
3          sensors               0V           DI3.2  %I3.1    IX_SLD_LightBarrierInlet_I2
4          Power supply (-)      0V
5          Power supply (-)      I1           AI1.0  %I3.2    IX_SLD_LightBarrierBehindColorSensor_I3
6          Pulse key             I2           DI3.3
7          Light barrier input   I3           DI3.4  %IW7     IW_SLD_ColorSensor_A4
           Light barrier after   A4           DI3.5  %I3.3    IX_SLD_LightBarrierWhite_I5
9          colour sensor         Analogue     DO5.0  %I3.4    IX_SLD_LightBarrierRed_I6
           Colour sensor         0-10VDC      DO5.1  %I3.5    IX_SLD_LightBarrierBlue_I7
10                               I5           DO5.2  %Q5.0    QX_SLD_M1_ConveyorBelt_Q1
11         Light barrier white   I6           DO5.3  %Q5.1    QX_SLD_Compressor_Q2
12         Light barrier red     I7           DO5.4
17         Light barrier blue    Q1                  %Q5.2    QX_SLD_ValveFirstEjectorWhite_Q3
18         Motor conveyor belt   Q2
20         Compressor            Q3                  %Q5.3    QX_SLD_ValveSecondEjectorRed_Q4
           Valve first ejector
21         (white)               Q4                  %Q5.4    QX_SLD_ValveThirdEjectorBlue_Q5
           Valve second ejector
22         (red)                 Q5
           Valve third ejector
           (blue)

119
Model wiring

Terminal Header ST1                          Ribbon cable  Sensors + actuators model
                                        1                  I1
5    Pulse key                          2                  I2
                                        3                  I3
2    24V (Sensor)                       4                  Q2 (compressor)
                                        5                  Q1 (Conveyor belt)
6    Light barrier input                6
                                        7                  Colour sensor (A4)
2    24V (Sensor)                       8
                                        9                  Light barrier lamp
7    Light barrier after colour sensor  10                 Light barrier lamp
                                        11
2    24V (Sensor)                       12                 I5
                                        13                 I7
3.4  GND                                14                 I6
                                        15                 Light barrier lamp
18   Compressor                         16                 Light barrier lamp
                                        17                 Light barrier lamp
3.4  GND                                18
                                        19                 Q3 (Valve first ejector, white)
17   Conveyor belt                      20                 Q4 (Valve second ejector, red)
                                                           Q5 (Valve third ejector, blue)
3.4  GND                                1
                                        2
2    9V (generated from 24V )           3
                                        4
9    Colour sensor (0-10V)              5
                                        6
     not assigned                       7
                                        8
3.4  GND                                9
                                        10
2    24V (Sensor)                       11
                                        12
3.4  GND                                13
                                        14
2    24V (Sensor)

     not assigned

     not assigned

     Header ST2

     not assigned

     not assigned

10   Light barrier white

2    24V (Sensor)

12   Light barrier blue

2    24V (Sensor)

11   Light barrier red

2    24V (Sensor)

3.4  GND

2    24V (Sensor)

3.4  GND

2    24V (Sensor)

3.4  GND

2    24V (Sensor)

3.4  Terminal V1

20

3.4  Terminal V2

21

 3.4
                   Terminal V3

 22

red = power supply

120
Assignment plan for sensor station with surveillance camera (SSC)

             Q5                                                      M2
          Q6                                                       I1

                             I2            Q8
        Q7                            I4
     M1

                                  A1
          I3

121
Environmental sensor Photo-resistor
The NFC reader is connected to the TXT controller via the I²C interface.
The mounted surveillance camera is connected to the TXT Controller via a USB interface.
Data from the environmental sensor and photo-resistor is also read in by the TXT Controller.

TXT-Controller (TxtGatewayPLC)

122
Terminal   Function                Designation  Clamp  I/O address Variable name
no. (ST1)                                       SPS
1                                  24V DC              S7-1500  S7-1500
                                                DI4.0
2          Power supply (+)        24V DC       DI4.1
3                                  0V           DI4.2
4          actuators               0V           DI4.3
5
6          Power supply (+)        I1           AI1.1
7                                  I2
8          sensors                 I3           DI5.3

9          Power supply (-)        I4           DI5.7
                                   A1
11         Power supply (-)        Analogue     DI6.3
                                   0-10VDC
12         Reference switch 1      B1           DI6.7  %I4.0    IX_SSC_RefSwitchVerticalAxis_I1
                                                DO6.0  %I4.1    IX_SSC_RefSwitchHorizontalAxis_I2
13         Reference switch 2      B2           DO6.1
                                                DO6.2  %I4.3    IX_SSC_LightBarrierStorage_I3
14         Light          barrier  B3           DO6.3  %I4.2    IX_SSC_LightBarrierOutsourcing_I4
19                                              DO6.4
20         outsourcing             B4           DO6.5
21                                              DO6.6
22         Light barrier storage   Q1 (M1)      DO6.7
23                                 Q2 (M1)      DO9.2
24         Colour sensor                        DO9.3
25                                 Q4 (M2)
26         Encoder vertical        Q3 (M2)             %IW9     IW_SSC_ColorSensor_A1
27         pulse 1                 Q5
28         Encoder vertical        Q6                  %I5.3    IX_SSC_EncoderVerticalAxisImp1_B1
           pulse 2                 Q7
           Encoder horizontal      Q8                  %I5.7    IX_SSC_EncoderVerticalAxisImp2_B2
           pulse 1
           Encoder horizontal      PWM (M1)            %I6.3    IX_SSC_EncoderHorizontalAxisImp1_B3
           pulse 2                 PWM (M2)
           Vertical motor up                           %I6.7    IX_SSC_EncoderHorizontalAxisImp2_B4
           Vertical motor down                         %Q6.0    QX_SSC_M1_VerticalAxisUp_Q1
           Turn motor anti-                            %Q6.1    QX_SSC_M1_VerticalAxisDown_Q2
           clockwise                                            QX_SSC_M2_HorizontalAxisCounter
           Turn motor clockwise                        %Q6.2    clockwise_Q4
           LED green                                   %Q6.3    QX_SSC_M2_HorizontalAxisClockwise_Q3
           LED yellow                                  %Q6.4    QX_SSC_LED_Green_Q5
           LED red                                     %Q6.5    QX_SSC_LED_Yellow_Q6
           LED red online status                       %Q6.6    QX_SSC_LED_Red_Q7
                                                       %Q6.7    QX_SSC_LED_Red_Online_Q8
           PWM vertical                                %QW27    QW_SSC_PWM_Vertical_M1
           PWM cantilever                              %QW29    QW_SSC_PWM_Horizontal_M2

123
   Model wiring

        Stiftleiste ST1

Klemme                                 Flachbandkabel Sensoren/Aktoren am Modell
                                                            I1
5       Referenz Kamera vertikal   1

2       24V (Sensor)               2

19      Kamera hoch                3   Q1/Q2 (M1)

20      Kamera runter              4

3,4     GND                        5   Encoder              vertikal

2       24V (Sensor)               6   Spannungsversorgung

11      A                          7   Signal                    A

12      B                          8   Signal B

6       Referenz Kamera horizontal 9   I2

2       24V (Sensor)               10

        Stiftleiste ST2

21      Kamera links               1   Q3/Q4(M2)

22      Kamera rechts              2

3,4     GND                        3   Encoder      horizontal

2       24V (Sensor)               4   Spannungsversorgung

13      A                          5   Signal                    A

14      B                          6   Signal B

3,4     GND                        7   Q5 LED grün

23      LED grün                   8

3,4     GND                        9   Q6 LED gelb

24      LED gelb                   10

3,4     GND                        11  Q7 LED rot

25      LED rot                    12

3,4     GND                        13  Q8 LED rot (Kamera)

26      LED rot(Kamera)            14

        Stiftleiste ST3

3,4     GND                        1   Spannungsversorgung
                                       Farbsensor
2       9V (Aus 24V Sensor erzeugt) 2  I3

7       Lichtschranke Auslagerung 3    Lampen für Lichtschranke

2       24V (Sensor)               4   I4
                                       I5
3,4     GND                        5   -

2       24V (Sensor)               6

8       Lichtschranke Einlagerung  7

2       24V (Sensor)               8

9       Farbsensor                 9

        nicht belegt               10

124
Assignment diagrams PLC connection board (560840 and
560841)

In this chapter you will find the assignment diagrams for the two boards which are connected to one another via two
cables (I) and (II).
560841 Learning Factory 4.0 24V with PLC connection board and
560840 Learning Factory 4.0 24V compl. with PLC S7-1500
On the model side, the distributor board is connected to the individual stations in the model via 5 flat ribbon cables. These
are already included in the delivery of variant 560841 or 560840.

Assignment diagram distributor board on the model:
With variant 560840 the PLC connection board is already wired up. With variant 560841 the PLC has to be connected to the
distributor board via cables. These are divided into groups, e.g. DO1+2a, ..., AI1b.
The cover can be loosened from below by undoing the four cross-head screws. When the bottom section has been
removed, the connectors can be used to connect the inputs and outputs to the PLC assemblies.
Assignment diagram PLC connection board:

  +24V
125
126
127
Programming tasks
In order to handle programming tasks, you will require prior knowledge of the programming language Structured
Text (ST or SCL) and on how to handle the programming tool you are using.
The provided programming solutions have been created with the TIA Portal V16 for a programmable controller
SIMATIC S7-1500 with CPU1512SP
Alternatively, other control systems can also be used with appropriate software.
An introduction to programming with the TIA Portal is available, for instance, here from SIEMENS:
http://www.siemens.com/sce/S7-1500
https://new.siemens.com/global/en/company/sustainability/education/sce/learning-training-
documents/advanced-programming.html
Further information is available at:
https://github.com/fischertechnik
The global fischertechnik library Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V and program solutions are available at:
https://github.com/fischertechnik/plc_training_factory_24v

128
Programming task 1:
Configuring and commissioning the SIMATIC controller with CPU1512SP

Task:
The complete hardware configuration for the controller must be created, loaded and tested for the
LearningFactory_4.0_24V, with all input and output modules.
A non-specified CPU will be created in order to determine all components.
This project with hardware configuration serves as the basis for all subsequent programming tasks.
Planning
1. Wire a START button as normally open contact (NO) and a STOP button as normally closed contact (NC) to

     two free inputs on the controller. Connect the LearningFactory_4_0_24V to the PLC and switch on the
     controller.
2. Create the project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf in the TIA portal.
3. In the TIA portal project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf, add a controller SIMATIC ET 200SP CPU
     or SIMATIC S7-1500 as a new device. Do so as a non-specified CPU, as described in the following
     programming information.
4. Connect the programming device to the CPU and determine the configuration of the connected device
     according to the programming information.
5. Set the input/output addresses of the detected modules according to the programming information and
     configure the module.
6. As shown in the programming information, dearchive the global library Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V ,
     and from there insert the global Start-Stop variable table into your project.
7. Load and test the hardware configuration with variable table into the controller.
8. Create an observation table named Beobachtungstabelle_watch table, insert signals from the global variable
     table there and check it by monitoring the button functions.
9. Save and archive the project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf.

129
Programming information:
Information on connecting the START and STOP buttons:
Two buttons are required for the following programming tasks. A START button as a NO contact
(NormallyOpen) and a STOP button as a NC contact (NormallyClosed). Fischertechnik mini-buttons can be
used for this purpose.

The mini-buttons are equipped with changeover contacts and can be used as both normally closed and
normally open contacts. The figure shows a circuit diagram of the mini-pushbuttons.

Contacts 1 and 2 are wired to a digital input on the PLC for use as NC contacts (NormallyClosed).
Contacts 1 and 3 are wired to a digital input on the PLC for use as NO contacts (NormallyOpen).
Details on connecting SIMATIC assemblies are provided in the handbooks.
Here is an example of connecting the digital input module DI 16x24VDC ST to the BaseUnit BU type A0 without
AUX terminal (1-wire connection):

130
Information on configuring a non-specified CPU1512SP:
Before a SIMATIC S7-1500 PLC can be configured, its hardware must be configured.
The fastest way to do so is to create a non-specified CPU and then have all components detected.
To do so, the programming device must be connected to the controller via Ethernet, and the IP addresses must be
set so that both devices are in the same subnet.
Setting the IP address is described in this document in the section Commissioning and adjusting the SIMATIC
controller CPU1512SP.
The configuration for our Training Factory Industry 4.04.0 can be completed using the following steps.

              First, start the Totally Integrated Automation Portal by double clicking on it. (  TIA Portal V16)

              In the portal view, click  Start  and then Create new project. Change the project name, path,
                 author and comment accordingly and then click  Create

131
       Then select  Start  Devices & Networks  and Add new device in the portal.
          Create a new CPU. To do so, use a non-specified model of the SIMATIC ET200 CPU with order number
          6ES7 5XX-XXXXX-XXXX.
          (Controller  SIMATIC ET200 CPU  ET 200SPCPU  Non-specified ST200SP CPU  6ES7 5XX-XXXXX-
          XXXX  V2.8)
          Assign a device name (device name  PLC), select Open device view and then click  Add.

       The TIA Portal will switch automatically to the project view, and will display a notification that this device
          is not specified. To have the hardware configuration identified automatically, start the detection by
          clicking Identify in the yellow info box. (  identify)

132
              First, select the type of PG/PC interface you are using and the network card you want to use to
                 create a connection to the PLC via Ethernet. ( Type of PG/PC interface: PN/IE  PG/PC interface:
                 Intel(R) Ethernet ...)
                 Now, start the search for devices on the network by clicking the  Start search button
                 Then, all available devices will be detected and listed. If you have selected the right CPU, then
                 clicking  Detect will cause the CPU in question and connected modules to be detected.

                Note: If your CPU is not in the list, ensure you have selected the right network card and that your
                laptop and CPU are connected.

133
              The TIA portal will now show the complete device configuration for the selected CPU. Now, you
                 can configure the CPU and the input/output assemblies according to your specifications.

134
Information on configuring the input/output assemblies
The addresses of the assemblies should be set as shown here.

Pulse width modulation (PWM) should be set as the operating mode for the output modules with addresses DO 7
- DO 30.

135
Operating mode DI \ Oversampling should be set for the input modules with addresses DI 5 to DI 6 for the encoder
inputs.

The measurement type voltage should be set with a measurement range of 0-10V for the channels of the analogue
input modules.

136
Information on global libraries:
The global variable tables and a module for encoder evaluation in a compressed library
Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V.zal16 are provided for programming tasks.
This can be opened by clicking on the symbol in Global Libraries to open a library, then selecting the
fileLibrary_LearningFactory_4_0_24V.zal16.

Elements from the library can then simply be copied to the relevant project folder via drag & drop.

137
Information on observation tables:
Observation tables can be created to test the function of factory modules and to determine position values later
on. Variables can then easily be moved to the observation tables via drag & drop from the detailed view of variable
tables.

In the expanded view , the inputs and outputs used in the program can also be controlled continuously. If
there are no buttons for the START and STOP functions, then these can be simulated in this manner.

138
Programming task 2:
Sensor station with camera (SSC), colour detection with colour sensor

Task:

The colour sensor on the input/output station should be used in the sensor station with camera (SSC) to detect different
blue/white/red workpieces.

When there is a workpiece on the colour sensor, the measured value of the colour sensor is evaluated, and the
result is displayed on an assigned LED. The evaluation only runs for as long as the START button is pressed.

Colour assignment:  green LED (Q5)
Blue                yellow LED (Q6)
White               red LED (Q7)
Red                 red LED online status (Q8)
No colour detected

The program should be created in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL).

Planning
1. In the TIA Portal, open the projectLearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf and save it under the name

     LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task02_SensorsSSC.
2. Copy the global variable table SSC Sensor Station, as shown in programming task 1, from the library

     Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V and insert it into your project.
3. As shown in programming task 1, expand the observation table, determine value ranges for the 3 colours

     blue/white/red there by placing the different workpieces on the sensor, and check the function of the buttons
     and sensors.
4. Create a library-capable code module in the programming language structured text (ST or SCL).
5. Create a new organisational module Main [OB1] in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL),
     access the library-capable code module there and connect these with global variables.
6. Load the complete program to the controller.
7. Test the program on the sensor station using a camera (SSC).
8. Monitor the program online and correct any errors.
9. Save and archive the project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task02_SensorsSSC.

139
Programming information
Information on creating library-capable programming modules:
Library-capable code modules are preferred for structured programming of PLC programs. This means that the
input and output parameters of a function or function module are determined generally in local variables, and are
only assigned current global variables (inputs/outputs) when using the module.
The advantage of this is that the module can be accessed multiple times.
Information on the colour sensor
The fischertechnik colour sensor emits white light, which different colour surfaces reflect to different degrees.
The photo-transistor measures the intensity of the reflected light and measures read as a voltage value ranging
between 0 V and 9 V on an analogue input 0-10V on the PLC. This measured value (0-9 V) is digitised into a whole
number between 0 and 24883 by the analogue input assembly.
The measured value depends on the ambient brightness as well as the distance of the sensor from the coloured
surface.
Therefore, the values for the 3 different workpieces in blue/white/red should be determined through multiple
measurements.
This makes it possible to calculate an average value for each colour. For the analysis, you should also stipulate a
tolerance range around this average value, since measurement results always involve a certain amount of
inaccuracy.

140
Programming task 3:
Sensor station with camera (SSC), camera movement without pulse width modulation (PWM)

Task:

The camera movement should be activated via the outputs directly in the sensor station with camera (SSC),
without pulse width modulation (PWM).

Press the START button to start a reference run. The camera will move horizontally and clockwise to the position
of the reference switch, horizontally and vertically down to the reference position for the vertical axis.
Press the STOP button to move the camera up for 2 seconds horizontally in an anti-clockwise direction, and
vertically up.
If START or STOP are pressed while the camera is moving, the direction will be reversed.

The program should be created in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL).

Planning
1. In the TIA Portal, open the projectLearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf and save it under the name

     LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task03_CameraSSC.
2. Copy the global variable table SSC Camera Station, as shown in programming task 1, from the library

     Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V and insert it into your project.
3. Insert the jumpers to provide a power supply to the bi-directional motors, so that the motors are fed directly

     via the +24V actuators.
4. Add to the monitoring table as shown in programming task 1, and check the function of I/O signals.
5. Create a library-capable code module in the programming language structured text (ST or SCL).
6. Create a new organisational module Main [OB1] in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL),

     access the library-capable code module there and connect these with global variables.
7. Load the complete program to the controller.
8. Test the program on the sensor station using a camera (SSC).
9. Monitor the program online and correct any errors.
10. Save and archive the project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task02_CameraSSC.
11. Insert the jumpers for the power supply to the bi-directional motors so that they are fed via the associated PWM

     terminals 2 and 3.

141
Programming information

Information on pulse width modulation (PWM):
 The bi-directional motors for the horizontal axis (turn camera) and the vertical axis (camera height) are controlled
 by relays and can be fed either directly via 24V of the actuators, or via the associated PWM terminals 2 and 3.

PWM 1  Sensor station with
PWM 2  camera (SSC)
PWM 3  - not assigned -
PWM 4  Camera height
       Turn camera
       - not assigned -

Assigning the PWM jumper:
The jumpers should be inserted at the right for this task for power supply via +24V (actuators).

The jumpers are on the adapter board

Programming information
Since the positive signal flank of the START button should be analysed in this task, and a timer is used, a function
block (FB) must be programmed here as a coding module.

142
Programming task 4:
Sorting line with colour detection (SLD); sequence with simple positioning function without
colour detection

Task:

Workpieces should be transported in the sorting line with colour detection (SLD) from the start of the belt to the
second storage location, regardless of their colour.

If there is a workpiece on the belt at the entrance to the light barrier, and if the second storage location is free,
press the START button to switch on the belt. The pulse button counts the pulses from the light barrier to the colour
sensor, in order to detect position. The belt should be stopped once the workpiece is in front of the second
extension cylinder.
There, the workpiece is moved to the second storage position by the second extension cylinder.
The workpiece must then be removed manually there.

Press the STOP button to stop the process. Workpieces must be removed from the system before the sorting line
can be started once again.

The program should be created in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL).

Planning
1. In the TIA Portal, open the projectLearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf and save it under the name

     LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task04_SortingSLD.
2. Copy the global variable table SLD Sorting Line with Detection, as shown in programming task 1, from the

     library Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V and insert it into your project.
3. Add to the monitoring table as shown in programming task 1, and check the function of I/O signals.
4. Create a library-capable code module with the sequence in the programming language structured text (ST or

     SCL).
5. Create a new organisational module Main [OB1] in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL),

     access the library-capable code module there and connect these with global variables.
6. Load the complete program to the controller.
7. Test the program on the sorting line with colour detection (SLD).
8. Monitor the program online and correct any errors.
9. Save and archive the project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task04_SortingSLD.

143
Programming information
Information on programming sequences in the programming language structured text (ST or SCL).
In addition to other options for programming a process control or a sequence in the programming language
Structured Text (ST or SCL), the control or sequence can be programmed, for instance, in a case instruction.
The number of the step that is currently being completed is always in the statistical variable #Step_number.
Only the commands programmed for the relevant step number are executed.
The system transitions to the next step by incrementing the variable #Step_number in the step by +1.
The variable #Step_number is set to 0 to transition from the last step to step 0 and reset the sequence.

Since statistical variables are also required in the sequence, a function block (FB) must be programmed here as
a code module.
Information on positioning
Since the conveyor belt does not move very quickly, and since the position in front of the extension cylinder does
not have to be very exact, it is enough to detect signals from the pulse sensor in the normal cyclical organisational
block OB1 for this simple positioning function.
A simple counter can be used to count the pulses in the program. The value can then be compared.
You can determine the number of required pulses by activating the conveyor belt motor and observing the counter
value.

144
Programming task 5:
Vacuum suction gripper (VGR); sequence with pulse width modulation (PWM) and simple
positioning function

Task:
The vacuum suction gripper station (VGR) should be used to transport workpieces independent of their colour
from the material storage to the material scrap area.

The motors for gripper movements are controlled via a relay and supplied with power via the associated PWM
terminals. The motor speed can be set using the output signals from pulse width modulation (PWM). The speed
should be set fairly low in this task, so that positioning is simpler.

Press the START button to start the process. First, the suction gripper moves back horizontally to the reference
switch, then up vertically, and finally in a clockwise direction to the reference position at the material storage.
Then, it positions the vacuum down vertically to the pick-up position at the material storage,
then switches the vacuum on and moves back up to the reference switch.
Now the suction gripper turns anti-clockwise to set down material scrap, then vertically down to the discharge
position, where it switches the vacuum off again.
Press the STOP button to stop the process.
The program should be created in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL).

Planning
1. In the TIA Portal, open the projectLearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf and save it under the name

     LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task05_VacuumGripperVGR.
2. Copy the global variable table VGR Vacuum Gripper Robot, as shown in programming task 1, from the library

     Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V and insert it into your project.
3. Check whether the jumpers for the power supply to the bi-directional motors are inserted so that they are fed

     via the associated PWM terminals 1, 2 and 3.
4. Add to the monitoring table as shown in programming task 1, and check the function of I/O signals.
5. Create a library-capable code module with the sequence in the programming language structured text (ST or

     SCL).
6. Create a new organisational module Main [OB1] in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL),

     access the library-capable code module there and connect these with global variables.
7. Load the complete program to the controller.
8. Test the program using the vacuum suction gripper (VGR).
9. Monitor the program online and correct any errors.
10. Save and archive the project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task05_VacuumGripperVGR.

145
Programming information

Information on pulse width modulation (PWM):
 The bi-directional motors for turning, for the horizontal axis and the vertical axis are controlled by relays and can
 be fed either directly via 24V of the actuators, or via the associated PWM terminals 1, 2 and 3.

       Vacuum suction    gripper
       (VGR)
PWM 1  Y(Vertical)
PWM 2
PWM 3  Z(Horizontal)
PWM 4
       X(Turn)

Assigning the PWM jumper:
The jumpers should be inserted on the left for PWM for this task. The motors are controlled via a relay and supplied
with power via the associated PWM terminals.

 The jumpers are on the adapter board

You can specify whole numbers (integer format) on the outputs for the PWM signals in the PLC program, and
thereby control the speed. A low speed should be specified here for all axes with a value of 400.

146
Information on positioning
Due to the low speed of the 3 axes, it is enough to detect pulse 1 from the respective encoder in the normal cyclical
organisational block OB1 for positioning.
A simple counter can be used to count the pulses in the program. The value can then be compared.
You can determine the number of pulses for the required positions by activating the individual axes and observing
the counter value.

Programming task 6:
Multi-processing station with oven (MPO); sequence with pulse width modulation (PWM) and
parallel actions

Task:
In the multi-processing station with oven (MPO), workpieces should undergo a burning process before they are
sawed and then transported to the next station.

The motors for vacuum suction and turntable movements are controlled via a relay and supplied with power via
the associated PWM terminals. The motor speed can be set using the output signals from pulse width modulation
(PWM).

First, a workpiece must be placed manually on the turntable.
Press the START button to start the process for a workpiece.
At the same time, the oven will open, the turntable will turn to the position at the vacuum, and the vacuum will
move to the turntable.
Then the vacuum will move down, switch on and lift the workpiece from the turntable.
While the linear axis moves to the oven, the extension there is extended.
Once it has arrived at the oven, the vacuum gripper will place the workpiece on the extension. The extension will
retract, the oven door will close and the burning process will be carried out for 5 seconds.
Then the oven door will open again, the extension will be extended, and the vacuum gripper will pick up the
workpiece once again to move it back to the turntable.
The turntable will then position the workpiece under the saw. The saw will process it for 5 seconds.
Then the workpiece will be turned into position on the belt and pushed to the extension cylinder on the belt there.
The conveyor belt will transport the workpiece to the light barrier at the end of the belt, where it can be removed
manually.

The program should be created in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL).
To shorten the time for a production cycle, complete multiple actions at the same time in a single step if possible.
The signals for pulse width modulation (PWM) and for the compressor should not be specified in the steps of the
sequence, but rather in subsequent ongoing operation.

147
Planning
1. In the TIA Portal, open the projectLearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf and save it under the name

     LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task06_MultiProcessingMPO.
2. Copy the global variable table MPO-Multi-Processing station with oven, as shown in programming task 1,

     from the library Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V and insert it into your project.
3. Check whether the jumpers for the power supply to the bi-directional motors are inserted so that they are fed

     via the associated PWM terminals 1 and 3.
4. Add to the monitoring table as shown in programming task 1, and check the function of I/O signals.
5. Create a library-capable code module with the sequence in the programming language structured text (ST or

     SCL).
6. Create a new organisational module Main [OB1] in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL),

     access the library-capable code module there and connect these with global variables.
7. Load the complete program to the controller.
8. Test the program using the vacuum suction gripper (VGR).
9. Monitor the program online and correct any errors.
10. Save and archive the project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task06_MultiProcessingMPO.

148
Programming information

Information on pulse width modulation (PWM):

 The bi-directional motors for the turntable and for horizontal movement of the vacuum on the linear axis are
 controlled by relays and can be fed either directly via 24V of the actuators, or via the associated PWM terminals
 1 and 3.

       Multi-processing      station
       (MPO)
PWM 1  Turntable
PWM 2  - not assigned -
PWM 3  Suction (Horizontal)
PWM 4  Oven pusher

Assigning the PWM jumper:
The jumpers should be inserted on the left for PWM for this task. The motors are controlled via a relay and supplied
with power via the associated PWM terminals.

 The jumpers are on the adapter board

You can specify whole numbers (integer format) on the outputs for the PWM signals in the PLC program, and
thereby control the speed.

149
Programming task 7:
Automated high-bay warehouse (HBW); sequence with pulse width modulation (PWM) and
positioning function with encoder
Task:
The automated high-bay warehouse (HBW) station is designed to move a pallet from the top front position (position
A1) and set it on the conveyor belt.
The motors for stacker crane movements are controlled via a relay and supplied with power via the associated
PWM terminals. The motor speed can be set using the output signals from pulse width modulation (PWM).
The encoder should be used to precisely position the axes.
Press the START button to start the process. First, the stacker crane moves the cantilever to the rear, then at the
same time to the reference switch horizontally and forward out of the storage area, as well as upward vertically.
In this reference position, positioning values are set to a reference value of 0.
Then the stacker crane moves to the front top position (position A1) to extend. There, the cantilever is extended
to move the vertical axis up briefly to lift the pallet. The cantilever will then move back.
Then the stacker crane will move to the discharge position on the conveyor belt. There, the cantilever is extended
once again to move the vertical axis down briefly to set down the pallet.
The cantilever then moves back, while the conveyor belt transports the pallet to the light barrier at the outside
end of the belt. The pallet must be removed manually before the process can be started once again.
Press the STOP button to stop the process.
The program should be created in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL).
To shorten the time for a production cycle, complete multiple actions at the same time in a single step if possible.
The signals for pulse width modulation (PWM) should not be specified in the steps of the sequence, but rather in
subsequent ongoing operation.

150
Planning
1. In the TIA Portal, open the projectLearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task01_HWConf and save it under the name

     LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task07_HighBayWarehouseHBW.
2. Copy the global variable table HBW automated high-bay warehouse, as shown in programming task 1, from

     the library Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V and insert it into your project.
3. Under programming modules, create a Positioning group and insert a wake alarm OB Cyclic Interrupt [OB30]

     there according to the programming information with a cycle of 1000 µs. Read in the Encoder inputs in the
     sub-process screen for this wake alarm OB.
4. Copy the library module FB_INC_DEC for encoder evaluation from the library
     Library_LearningFactory_4.0_24V and insert it into your project in the Positioning group.
5. Create a global data block Positioning [DB90] in the Positioning group with a global variable for position (INT)
     and direction (BOOL) for the horizontal and vertical axis.
6. Access and activate the module FB_INC_DEC for encoder evaluation in the wake alarm OB Cyclic Interrupt
     [OB30] for both the horizontal and vertical axes.
7. Check whether the jumpers for the power supply to the bi-directional motors are inserted so that they are fed
     via the associated PWM terminals 1, 2.3 and 4.
8. As shown in programming task 1, add all input/output signals and the values from the global data block
     Positioning [DB90] to the observation tables. Check the functions of the I/O signals and encoder analysis with
     the help of the observation table, and determine position values for the positions required in the program.
9. Create a library-capable code module with the sequence in the programming language structured text (ST or
     SCL).
10. Create a new organisational module Main [OB1] in the programming language Structured Text (ST or SCL),
     access the library-capable code module there and connect these with global variables.
11. Load the complete program to the controller.
12. Test the program using the automated high-bay warehouse (HBW).
13. Monitor the program online and correct any errors.
14. Save and archive the project LearningFactory_4_0_24V_Task07_HighBayWarehouseHBW.

151
Programming information

Information on pulse width modulation (PWM):

 The bi-directional motors for the cantilever, for the conveyor belt, for the horizontal axis and the vertical axis are
 controlled by relays and can be fed either directly via 24V of the actuators, or via the associated PWM terminals
 1, 2.3 and 4.

PWM 1  High-bay warehouse
PWM 2  (HBW)
PWM 3  Conveyor belt
PWM 4  X(Horizontal)
       Y(Vertical)
       Cantilever

Assigning the PWM jumper:
The jumpers should be inserted on the left for PWM for this task. The motors are controlled via a relay and supplied
with power via the associated PWM terminals.

 The jumpers are on the adapter board

You can specify whole numbers (integer format) on the outputs for the PWM signals in the PLC program, and
thereby control the speed.

152
Information on creating a wake alarm OB and reading in the encoder inputs
Wake alarm OBs can be used to start program components at equidistant time intervals and read in inputs
accordingly. Create a wake alarm OB with a 1ms cycle time as follows:

The settings must be changed so that inputs in the sub-process screen (TPA 1) for this wake alarm OB must be
read in for the assemblies for encoder inputs.

153
Information on positioning with the encoder and fischertechnik library module FB_INC_DEC
In this programming task, tracks A+B and pulses 1 and 2 for the encoders must be recorded for the horizontal and
vertical axes in a wake alarm organizational module with a cycle time of 1ms, in order to ensure precise positioning
even with high speed movements.
A module FB_INC_DEC has already been provided in the available library Library_LearningFactory_4_0_24V for
encoder evaluation. It can simply be copied from there into the project.

154
The module FB_INC_DEC for encoder evaluation assesses the pulses for the two channels at the inputs #inx_CHa
and #inx_CHb.
This is used to determine the direction #outx_dir and a position value #outi_cnt and provide these as outputs.
The input #inx_RST can be used to reset the position value to a reference value #ini_REF_val.

The module FB_INC_DEC for encoder evaluation should be accessed and activated in a wake alarm OB for both
the horizontal and vertical axes.
The position values can be determined for the positions required in the program by activating the individual axes
and monitoring the position values in the observation table. The reference position in each case is 0.

155
1. 2020 edition

fischertechnik GmbH

Klaus-Fischer-Straße 1  Ph: (+49) 7443 12 - 4369

72178 Waldachtal        E-Mail: info@fischertechnik.de

156
